1:"$Sreact.fragment"
2:I[240,["831","static/chunks/bd904a5c-fc8dcb7c7ed62fed.js","367","static/chunks/b536a0f1-eec8f286fa64687b.js","713","static/chunks/713-3f965a546658b628.js","549","static/chunks/549-8d661d0a45b3299c.js","402","static/chunks/402-6a7918a101208354.js","829","static/chunks/829-21f1ac4e13d95016.js","709","static/chunks/709-a9fdb3d095429df7.js","974","static/chunks/app/page-0b41f2305d1df768.js"],"WebGLShader"]
3:I[21,["831","static/chunks/bd904a5c-fc8dcb7c7ed62fed.js","367","static/chunks/b536a0f1-eec8f286fa64687b.js","713","static/chunks/713-3f965a546658b628.js","549","static/chunks/549-8d661d0a45b3299c.js","402","static/chunks/402-6a7918a101208354.js","829","static/chunks/829-21f1ac4e13d95016.js","709","static/chunks/709-a9fdb3d095429df7.js","974","static/chunks/app/page-0b41f2305d1df768.js"],"Image"]
4:I[8709,["831","static/chunks/bd904a5c-fc8dcb7c7ed62fed.js","367","static/chunks/b536a0f1-eec8f286fa64687b.js","713","static/chunks/713-3f965a546658b628.js","549","static/chunks/549-8d661d0a45b3299c.js","402","static/chunks/402-6a7918a101208354.js","829","static/chunks/829-21f1ac4e13d95016.js","709","static/chunks/709-a9fdb3d095429df7.js","974","static/chunks/app/page-0b41f2305d1df768.js"],"EtherSignup"]
5:I[6618,["831","static/chunks/bd904a5c-fc8dcb7c7ed62fed.js","367","static/chunks/b536a0f1-eec8f286fa64687b.js","713","static/chunks/713-3f965a546658b628.js","549","static/chunks/549-8d661d0a45b3299c.js","402","static/chunks/402-6a7918a101208354.js","829","static/chunks/829-21f1ac4e13d95016.js","709","static/chunks/709-a9fdb3d095429df7.js","974","static/chunks/app/page-0b41f2305d1df768.js"],"PaginatedPostIndex"]
a3:I[8937,[],"OutletBoundary"]
a4:"$Sreact.suspense"
6:Td21,My early-stage academic research made its debut this summer at conferences held by Exeter University and Boston College. Woo and the Nature of Man is a personal project I’m working on while studying on the Psychedelics Postgraduate Certificate course at the University of Exeter . It looks at the price of men’s mental ill health on society, the high numbers of men dropping out of talk therapy programs, and why many men are seemingly turning to psychedelics for improved health and wellbeing instead. Its goal is to ‘study the potential of emerging health and performance strategies, plus their autonomous application’ – find reliable new ways to sort ourselves out. This summer I lined up with other swots in the research poster presentations at Integrating Integration, a two-day lecture series held by the University of Exeter. The presentation asked ‘what can services learn from men seeking psychedelic treatment?’ Keynote speaker, ayahuasca anthropologist Evigny Fotiou was notably intrigued by the section on decolonising masculinity. See more in the all-new Research section here. Weeks later I spoke about ‘how psychedelics help men engage with spirituality’ at US university Boston College’s London campus, as part of its Psychology and the Other meet. The whole (rather swanky) conference wasn’t recorded: a baller move in this day and age, but admittedly jarring for someone like myself who’s used to organising events purely for the one photo of Kate Moss arriving that will hopefully appear in The Evening Standard next day. I ripped off the title Woo and the Nature of Man from the first workplace motivation guide for managers, Work and the Nature of Man written 1967 by Frederick Herzberg. The research is at its conceptual stage (ahem) which means I’m deep-diving for themes in the relevant academic literature that add to or inform the data I’ve picked up personally in what I now refer to as ‘male spaces’. One finding of note so far is that emerging spiritualities encourage men to explore other forms of unconventional masculinity besides the feminised option offered by contemporary culture – NFL quarterback Aaron Rodgers expressing unconditional cosmic love for his team mates, for example, in contrast to Harry Styles wearing a dress on a magazine cover. Another discovery is that women in what were once men’s roles, like the military, emergency services or professional leadership positions, drop out of trauma services in the same numbers that men do – possibly because our comfort-based culture cannot accommodate the complex experiences that come with a richer and more challenging life path. I’m studying on the world’s first ever legit university postgrad in psychedelic science and humanities . Sign up for Messages from the Ether below, or follow me on Twitter and Instagram to stay with the vibe. More from University of Exeter: ‘Psychedelic philosophy’ or ‘psy-phi’ aims to legitimise the culture of consciousness expansion. And much more. “Social, ethical, legal and metaphysical issues can undergo a transformation akin to psychedelic therapy” says an inspiring new movement, with beards to match. Can psychedelic philosophy explain the healing powers of the cosmic whole? Related reading Vital Study Zine Week One: The Ground Zero of LSD Research Kool-Aid Corner #37:T695,Why are many men choosing psychedelics to help aid their wellbeing? Often instead of established health services? I’m finding out in this ongoing project filed under ‘Research’ undertaken during postgraduate study in Psychedelic Studies from The University of Exeter, UK . Woo and the Nature of Man looks at the price of men’s mental ill health on society, the high numbers of men dropping out of talk therapy programs, and why many men are seemingly turning to psychedelics for improved health and wellbeing instead. Its goal is to ‘study the potential of emerging health and performance strategies, plus their autonomous application’ – in other words, find reliable new ways to sort ourselves out. Naturally I’d be delighted to share my findings at upcoming conferences and seminars – get in touch here . I’ve already presented on ‘What can services learn from men seeking psychedelic treatment?’ at Exeter University’s Psychedelic Integration Conference , and about ‘How psychedelics help men engage with spirituality’ at Psychology and the Other in London. I ripped off the title Woo and the Nature of Man from the first workplace motivation guide for managers, Work and the Nature of Man written 1967 by Frederick Herzberg. The research is at its conceptual stage (ahem) which means I’m deep-diving for themes in the relevant academic literature that add to or inform the data I’ve picked up personally, in what I now refer to as ‘male spaces’. Sign up for Messages from the Ether below, or follow me on Twitter and Instagram to stay with the vibe. Related reading Vital Study Zine Week One: The Ground Zero of LSD Research Kool-Aid Corner #38:T85c,Why are many men choosing psychedelics to help aid their wellbeing? Often instead of established health services? I’m finding out in this ongoing project filed under ‘Research’ in the website menus undertaken during postgraduate study  in Psychedelic Studies from The University of Exeter, UK . Woo and the Nature of Man looks the price of mens’ mental ill health on society, the high numbers of men dropping out of talk therapy programs, and why many men are seemingly turning to psychedelics for improved health and wellbeing instead. Its goal is to ‘study the potential of emerging health and performance strategies, plus their autonomous application’ – in other words, find reliable new ways to sort ourselves out. Naturally I’d be delighted to share my findings at upcoming conferences and seminars – get in touch here . I’ve already presented on ‘What can services learn from men seeking psychedelic treatment?’ at Exeter University’s Psychedelic Integration Conference , and about ‘How psychedelics help men engage with spiriutality’ at Psychology and the Other in London. I ripped off the title Woo and the Nature of Man from the first workplace motivation guiode for managers, Work and the Nature of Man witten 1967 by Frederick Herzbergis. The research is at its conceptual stage (ahem) which means I’m deep-diving for themes in the relevant academic literature that add to or inform the data I’ve picked up personally, in what I now refer to as ‘male spaces’. Sign up for Messages from the Ether below, or follow me on Twitter and Instagram to stay with the vibe. More University of Exeter : Featured Philosophy of Psychedelics with Dr Peter Sjöstedt-Hughes ‘Psychedelic philosophy’ or ‘psy-phi’ aims to legitimise the culture of consciousness expansion. And much more. Next Up, The Psychedelic Enlightenment “Social, ethical, legal and metaphysical issues can undergo a transformation akin to psychedelic therapy” says an inspiring new movement, with beards to match. Become one with your Moomin cup… Can psychedelic philosophy explain the healing powers of the cosmic whole?9:T724,Stanford’s Ripal Shah and Bangkok Psychedelic Society’s Neil Gehani will be among 24 speakers over 24 hours I’ll be among the cohosts at the Asian Voices in the Psychedelic Movement 24 Hour Circle Sat 25 May from 10am on the west coast/6pm UK through till Sunday 26. Many more guests to be announced. Sign up any time to join the Zoomcast via the Eventbrite link here . Watch on YouTube via Entheo Society Washington’s livestream section. I’ll put the Zoom link here when I get it too. It’ll be live on Facebook too. The 24 Zoom comes out of Seattle from Entheo Society , AWAKE.net and Holly House. Drop in and out anytime and get a blast of community on microdosing day, with new guesys speaking and hosting every hour. This is the latest in a series of all-day remote circles: previous guests include MAPS’ Rick Doblin, Chief Phil Lane Jnr, Ayana Iyi, Ayize Jama-Everett and Harry Smith. More on New Psychonaut: Featured Trailer , Shadow , Deanna Rogers , Ayahuasca , Indigenous , Shipibo , Boundaries You Must Respect the Circle of Life to Drink Ayahuasca Trailer , Shadow , Deanna Rogers , Ayahuasca , Indigenous , Shipibo , Boundaries It’s a mistake to believe psychedelics shelter us from the realities of existence, say indigenous healers. Trailer , Shadow , Deanna Rogers , Ayahuasca , Indigenous , Shipibo , Boundaries Trailer , Fashion , Mackenzie Amara Wavy Garms Trailer , Fashion , Mackenzie Amara What the modern-day professional psychopomp is wearing this season. Trailer , Fashion , Mackenzie Amara Albion , Pagan , Global , Ceremony , Rita Hiraiz , Trailer , Trauma Let them know it’s Saturnalia time Albion , Pagan , Global , Ceremony , Rita Hiraiz , Trailer , Trauma Heal the world from collective trauma, says Thomas Hubl. Albion , Pagan , Global , Ceremony , Rita Hiraiz , Trailer , Traumaa:T517,My psychedelic smart casual game is in effect during the promo video Vital shot at the UK Breaking Convention conference. Click on the YouTube panel above to watch. I’m assured more of my platitudinous bon mots will appear in future assets. The world’s only decent psychedelic conference Breaking Convention was held at Exeter University where I’ve begun the psychology MSc. “Any entities give me any trouble I just zap ‘em with the ol’ West Country beams…” I’m sitting in on the Philosophy of Psychedelics BA course. I’ve been accepted to the world’s first ever legit university postgrad in psychedelic science and humanities starting January 2024. Sign up for Messages from the Ether below, or follow me on Twitter and Instagram to stay with the vibe. More University of Exeter : Featured Philosophy of Psychedelics with Dr Peter Sjöstedt-Hughes ‘Psychedelic philosophy’ or ‘psy-phi’ aims to legitimise the culture of consciousness expansion. And much more. Next Up, The Psychedelic Enlightenment “Social, ethical, legal and metaphysical issues can undergo a transformation akin to psychedelic therapy” says an inspiring new movement, with beards to match. Become one with your Moomin cup… Can psychedelic philosophy explain the healing powers of the cosmic whole?b:T5d1,Join MAPS’ Rick Dublin, US Santo Daime pioneer Jonathan Goldman, the School of Hebrew Shamanism’s Miriam J. Katz and more on the Zoomcast or watch live I’ll be among the cohosts at the All Things Jewish 24 Hour Circle Sunday 26 Nov from 10am on the west coast/6pm UK through till Sunday 27. Sign up any time to join the Zoomcast via the Eventbrite link here . Watch on YouTube via Entheo Society Washington’s livestream section. The Zoom link will be up on the Eventbrite page before start, I’ll put it in this article too. My ancestor Alpert Uprecht changed his name to Albert Upright after emigrating to Yorkshire, UK from what would soon become Germany. He married a Celtic girl and many generations later, I am Anglo-Saxon. How does that work? Anyway everyone will have better things to talk about. It’ll be live on Facebook too. The 24 Zoom comes out of Seattle from its ADAPT-WA org and Entheo Society . Drop in and out anytime and get a blast of community on microdosing day, via your laptop, phone or personal device. More veterans’ interest stories here on New Psychonaut: Featured Anger is an NRG Take a (small) step closer to the dark side for more assertiveness and self-compassion. War and peace K’s used by combat medics but its ‘glutamate surge’ could hold victory for depressed civilians. MDMA Assisted Therapy with Michael and Annie Mithoefer Gotta love MAPS, whose therapist dyad ‘The Mithoefers’ conceived the almost-FDA-approved MDMA-AT program.c:T55b,I’m co-hosting this live-streamed discussion with ex-military service people sharing their stories. Watch live or join the call, links below Ex-military personnel are at the vanguard of the psychedelic healing movement. Hear personal stories from former soldiers working with psychedelics to help heal trauma and other issues, from 6pm UK/10am PST on Saturday 15 July. Here’s the free link to join the call plus it’ll be live on YouTube and Facebook too. I’ll be co-hosting on Sunday morning UK time. Later on at 3pm I’ll introducing British infantryman turned MMA coach Ben Vickers (7am PDT and midday in NY). Ben taught me MMA before moving to Western Australia where he trains UFC contender Jack Della Maddellena . The 24 Zoom comes out of Seattle from its ADAPT-WA org and Entheo Society . Drop in and out anytime and get a blast of community on microdosing day, via your laptop, phone or personal device. More veterans’ interest stories here on New Psychonaut: Featured Anger is an NRG Take a (small) step closer to the dark side for more assertiveness and self-compassion. War and peace K’s used by combat medics but its ‘glutamate surge’ could hold victory for depressed civilians. MDMA Assisted Therapy with Michael and Annie Mithoefer Gotta love MAPS, whose therapist dyad ‘The Mithoefers’ conceived the almost-FDA-approved MDMA-AT program.d:T53f,Grab the free link below for the next inclusive global gathering hosted by Entheo Society Washington . Save the planet – one remote meeting marathon at a time. Here’s the free link to join me this Saturday 10 June from 6pm UK (10am PST) when I'm co-hosting the latest 24-hour open-access psychedelic circle from Entheo Society of Washington . This month the theme’s ‘Psychedelics and Environmental Activism’. Every hour a fresh speaker from the world of eco-consciousness shares the story of their work. They’ll speak on not only the climate crisis, but also about how re-engaging with the natural world can be highly beneficial to personal, and clinical, practice. Drop in and out anytime. You can also just watch on Facebook here and there’ll be a live Youtube stream too. It’s stimulating company for microdosing day, right there on your laptop. More eco-psychedelia here on New Psychonaut: Featured You Must Respect the Circle of Life to Drink Ayahuasca It’s a mistake to believe psychedelics shelter us from the realities of existence, say indigenous healers. Complex cosmologies, explained Syrupy new age spirituality cannot hope to illustrate our lived experience. What can? Infinite Debt to the Biosphere “We are in infinite debt to the biosphere, that we cannot possibly hope to repay.” But let’s give it a go.e:T570,Join me Saturday 11pm PST Sunday 7am UK for the next inclusive global gathering hosted by Entheo Society Washington. Grab the free link below Sacred Sexuality, Safety, & Sexual Misconduct in Ceremonial and Healing Space is a 24hr circle this weekend Remember when we danced till Sunday morning? Stopping only to chat awhile about sex, drugs and complex cosmologies? Well now we can again! (On Zoom.) Here’s the free link to join me this Sunday 28 May from 7am UK where I'm moderating the latest 24-hour open-access psychedelic circle from Entheo Society of Washington. Or just watch on Facebook here . Make it part of your morning practice – or better still join from 5pm UK today Saturday 27, or anytime right through to 5pm Sunday.  The theme’s ‘Sacred Sexuality, Safety and Sexual Misconduct’. I'm chatting about how some psychedelic ceremonies could benefit from some old school rave etiquette, and learn from lapses thereof – at 7am UK time Sunday morning, fittingly.  That's 11pm PST so prime late-night Saturday after dark chat for some of you. Featured Drugs are the Love MDMA for couples therapy: 4/4 octopuses can’t be wrong. Unconditionally loving cuddles: Yes or No? What if the patient would benefit from a clasp of the shoulder ot supportive hug? Easy tiger… Peak sexual experience DMT could be key to women’s earth-shattering cervical ‘full body’ orgasms.f:T1f7c,Omega-level operators speak about their time in ‘DMTx’ breakthrough states lasting hours as opposed to minutes Mary Jacoob , ‘Divination of the Municipal Bank’ They told Dr Andrew Gallimore ‘It can’t be done. You’re mad.’ But as arguably the most far-out head in the space explained in he and Dr Rick ‘The Spirit Molecule’ Strassman’s proposal for extended voyages with intense visionary substance DMT, all you’d need is a regular target-controlled intravenous infusion kit. Like they use to administer general anaesthetic. Which you can buy off the Internet for £90 . Better still, get the interns at Imperial College Psychedelic Research Centre to whip up what’s colloquially become known as ‘The DMTx Machine’. And recruit some present-day explorers into the unknown to have a go on it first. “It’s like bounding into the strongest moment of an ayahuasca session,” says Anton Bilton, founder of The Tyringham Initiative and backer of trials in extended DMT – ‘DMTx’ – experiences. “This is a closer route to the mystery of our existence than sending rockets into space” Eight intrepid psychonauts in total hooked up to titrated DMT drips under the expert eyes of Dr Robin Carharrt-Harris and team. Pioneers from the hyperspace mission’s crew – Carl Hayden Smith , Jack Allocca , Alexander Beiner and Bilton himself – spoke about their courageous foray in a heavyweight forum hosted by Graham Hancock and DMTx’s inventors , Andrew Gallimore and Rick Strassman . Psychedelic history hang in the air as Gallimore and The Strass witnessed their seemingly lunatic plans come to fruition, surprisingly smoothly. It was only the day after his initial extended DMT voyage that I first met Dr Allocca, at the Breaking Convention conference in Whitechapel this time last year. He showed me photos. “Can it help access the active intellect? The sum of all past, present and future knowledge?” There he was with the brain scanner flashing away on his head, which looked visually appropriate at least. As did the chap playing a lute sat in the corner. The rest of the clinical testing room, ochre carpet and all, not so much. “I was literally being probed and scanned, like I was in a bad trip machine,” he relayed during an online debrief held this week. I noted how healthy and insouciant he appeared, considering.  Since, I’ve also noted he always appears healthy and insouciant – due to healthy psychonautic living, he says. At a talk by Dr Allocca I attended here in Shoreditch last month, he suggested that some DMTx crew members relished the experience more than others. "We have to be careful not to create a biochemical Netflix” Alloca, Bilton, Beiner and Carl Hayden-Smith – who went first, and spoke at length during Breaking Convention in Exeter – were certainly effusive on the call. Perhaps not in the manner of your average hyperspace debrief though – feelings of humility and gratitude, rather than stuff like the Library of Alexandria rushing past, provided a common thread in their trailblazing trip reports. Props to Noonautics and Dr Gallimore for putting the panel together. On preparing for DMTx Carl Hayden-Smith: ”I treated it as a DMT church. For a month: no drugs, no caffeine… and no orgasms. That radically ramped up the intensity."  Jack Alloca: “I followed the psychonautic lifestyle that I always do. I haven’t even drank a cup of coffee for years. But being among first brings apprehension: ‘What am I doing to myself?’ I’d flown straight in and was really jet lagged.” Anton Bilton: “I tried to bring a sense of sacredness that is important to me. Four to six weeks of no sex, no drugs, no alcohol, lots of meditation.” On riding it out Jack Alloca: “I’ve taken over 100 different psychedelic compounds. The body load can be strong during DMTx, I used controlled breathing to moderate that. My neuropharmacology knowledge assured me about toxicity.” Alexander Beiner: “A entity told TerenceMcKenna ‘Don’t give way to amazement.’ I used attitudinal techniques like curiosity, then discernment, and a combination of concentration and mindfulness meditation, to attempt that.” Lessons from the deep Alexander Beiner: "The sophistication of the teaching was impeccable, with a crisp quality. It demonstrated the overlap between the metaphysical realm and how we show up, every day, as a human.” Jack Alloca: “The message was of primal being, connected in nature. A beautiful pastoral environment with Dr Seuss style simian entities who were uninterested in my presence.” Carl Hayden Smith: “‘Live well.’ Human life is precious and short. Life – brief, void – forever. ‘Entities’ obviously have a very different ontology.” One small step for heads? Anton Bilton: “My interest lies primarily in communicating with the sentient other. This is a closer route to the mystery of our existence than sending rockets into space.” Jack Alloca: “I was able to savour a narrative about myself which isn’t usually possible with regular, shorter DMT trips. Real world lessons about responsibility. Although I did rush to the toilet while still breaking through at one point, which was the first time I’d moved around in the breakthrough state before.” Carl Hayden Smith: “I was taken beyond the white room of the DMT space and was surprised to be shown there was more than one ‘oneness’… an infinite multiplicity of cosmic unions.” Being sensible… Carl Hayden Smith: “The human experience is vital and extremely important. Aldous Huxley warned about ‘living in a dreamworld’ and this tech could combine with AI to offer exactly that." Jack Alloca: "We have to be careful not to create a biochemical Netflix. How can we understand what is useful and bring it back to the human experience, seamlessly and coherently and healthily?"  Okay now we can talk about entities Carl Hayden Smith: “They benefit from our energy. There’s a mutual exchange. The MRI scanner first seemed to attract entities; they were intrigued by the notion of someone else doing the scanning. Second session in the MRI, there weren’t any. I think they were embarrassed they’d given the game away that I was immortal last time.” Jack Alloca: “I have been privileged to see entities in spaces besides DMTx. My lucid dreams often feel more intense than DMT. Are we equipped to navigate hyperspace? Or are we simply devising a way to process the deluge of incoming information? Either way, we are faced by a very powerful modality.” The Strass sums up Rick Strassman: “Nobody’s mentioned endogenous DMT. What is the relationship between the concentrations of DMT used in our daily lives and a breakthrough dose? It’s especially in the frontal cortex; is it a reality thermostat? Is the purpose to keep us in a consensus range?” “If DMT stimulates the imagination… can it access the active intellect? The sum of all past, present and future knowledge?” “Less whimsical, and more on the practical or metaphysical side, grounding in the problems we are facing as individuals and societies.  “The set-up is not user-friendly. We can improve it with systems used for insulin, pumps that mean you’re not bed bound. Then we can look at operating in the 3D world while breaking through, quantified self approaches and interpersonal communication during the experience.” Follow me on Twitter for live reports on the most mind-blowing talks More DMT breakthroughs on New Psychonaut: Featured Contemporary Research with Dr Rick Strassman Who on an otherwise genteel psychedelic training course would casually riff on orgasms, prophets and brainwashed assassins? Dr Rick ‘Spirit Molecule’ Strassman. Boldly going where no heads have gone before Strassman and Andrew Gallimore’s seemingly lunatic plans for a ‘DMaTrix’ have become reality. If you can still call it that. This may hurt a little… Spare no sacred cows in your own work, is Dr Rick Strassman’s top tip for psychotherapists.10:Td66,The Zoom call background display of certificates grows albeit slowly This certificate just arrived from Vital. And I got an offer from modern-day mystery school Exeter University to study a psychology MSc. Regular readers know how massively impressed I am with Psychedelics Today’s year-long flagship practicioner training course . Expert advice informed me to “get a speciality” before formal postgraduate study. Initially I was stumped. Not for long. Vital was unapologetically aspirational, and altruistic – its teaching faculty an all-star squadron of psychedelics. And the US course was less than half of the price of the admitedly well-know, flashy European alternative… which actually went spectacularly bust just as Vital was winding down. The second Vital cohort’s just started. You can still just about get on it. There’ll be offers, maybe bursaries too. Modern day mystery school Exeter University announced the world’s first legit psychedelic postgrad While aimed at clinicians, therapists, activists and professionals, they took me. Then let me ask the likes of Bill Richards and The Mithoefers whatever I wanted. Questions about laughing and crying respectively, come to think of it. My tutor was an expert in Carl Jung and alchemy , and the study group featured a disaster zone psychotherapist, an ex-banker who takes veterans to jungle ceremonies, and an otherwise straight-up christian pastor who’s been licensed to guide mushroom ceremonies for years. Plus a permaculture gardening psychedelic sex therapist . I held space on retreat which was fucking wild and a story for another day. I really miss having it in my life. And felt like I was cheating death a bit (with inevitable upcoming consequences) by carrying on with learning about a fascinating and worthwhile subject, at the highest level available. Until I remembered that was the idea in the first place. The colourful and attractive people are a syncronicity. And amost certainly a sign things are going in the right direction. On that front. I’ve received a formal offer to study on a psychology MSc from modern day mystery school Exeter University. That’s where the Philosophy of Psychedelics set-up is. The world-ranked institution based in the West Country of England just announced the world’s first ever legit university postgrad in psychedelic science and humanities too. Goddess willing I start in September. There’s all sorts of logistical hurdles still to be overcome. And other possibilities to consider. Or events that require adapting to: pre-Covid I’d just taken a job in Ibiza, and found myself on the penultimate British Airways flight off the White Island with only three other passengers, sat in adjacent rows drinking and sharing life stories at 10.30am. Plus I’ve a bunch of Vital notes still to write up in the Unofficial Vital Student ‘Zine which I’ll post over the summer. Sign up for Messages from the Ether below, or follow me on Twitter and Instagram to stay with the vibe. More West Country shizzle: Featured Ravers score rare victory over Mondays ‘Peak early and don’t skimp on quality’ is the Awakn formula to avoid MDMA comedowns. More mushroom tea, vicar? Savvy brits are sussed to self-care and change is happening. But the vulnerable are being left behind. Hymn of the Big Wheel My hometown has a psychedelic amusement park and high street ketamine clinics. How did that happen?11:T8d1,Sold to support my training and research they’re part garment, part mystical experience Featured 'Brahma' Unique (L) £350.00 One of a kind made with multiple tie-dying treatments. Large (L) size. Uses 100% cotton light-weight, high-quality kaftan. Includes organic wooden geometric pull tags. Hooded with button-up neck. Hand tie-dyed in Albion by heads. Post-washed with Synthrapol to keep the colours bright and run-free. Email furthur@newpsychonaut.com with custom colour requests. 'Huxley' Unique (XL) £400.00 One of a kind. Extra large (XL) size. Multiple colours. Symetrical fold ice dye method. Uses 100% cotton light-weight, high-quality kaftan. Includes organic wooden geometric pull tags. Hooded with button-up neck. Hand tie-dyed in Albion by heads. Post-washed with Synthrapol to keep the colours bright and run-free. Email furthur@newpsychonaut.com with custom colour requests. 'Phoenix' Unique (L) £350.00 One of a kind made with multiple tie-dying treatments. Large (L) size. Uses 100% cotton light-weight, high-quality kaftan. Includes organic wooden geometric pull tags. Hooded with button-up neck. Hand tie-dyed in Albion by heads. Post-washed with Synthrapol to keep the colours bright and run-free. Email furthur@newpsychonaut.com with custom colour requests. Ceremonial Kaftan (to order S-XL) £175.00 One colour. Available to order in most colours! 2-6 weeks delivery. Email furthur@newpsychonaut.com with custom colour requests. Uses 100% cotton light-weight, high-quality kaftan. Includes organic wooden geometric pull tags. Hooded with button-up neck. Hand tie-dyed in Albion by heads. Post-washed with Synthrapol to keep the colours bright and run-free. Here’s some photos of single colour designs made for folks already. Never turn up to the ceremony underdressed again with unique tie-dye kaftans from New Psychonaut Email me at kaftans@newpsychonaut.com with your enquiries for custom colours and combinations. Or click through to the merch store to browse the collection . Conceived and crafted over lockdown to get myself away from a screen (what did you think I’d be making, sourdough bread?) they take the otherwise exhausting notion of ‘festival wear’ to another level. Browse the tie-dye kaftan collection now12:T8ad,From ‘Novae’ by Lab212 Collective at Wavelength : A Momentary Spring at Beijing Times Art Museum till 1 July Carl Jung’s psychology lends substance to psychedelic vision work. No wonder it’s fast becoming the framework of choice. Here’s the shadowiest moments from the Vital lecture on Jung, and its shadow work course courtesy Dr Ido Cohen and friends . Featured Introduction , Zine #19 The Jung Ones Introduction , Zine #19 Carl Jung’s psychology provides a framework for psychedelic experience. With Dr Ido Cohen and friends. Introduction , Zine #19 Approach , Zine #19 New Aion Approach , Zine #19 Only now are Carl Jung’s most profound messages coming to light. Approach , Zine #19 Therapy , Zine #19 What Goddess encounters really say about your lifestyle Therapy , Zine #19 Psychedelic visions reflect real-world events, relationships and consequences. Therapy , Zine #19 Space Holding , Zine #19 You Must Respect the Circle of Life to Drink Ayahuasca Space Holding , Zine #19 It’s a mistake to believe psychedelics shelter us from the realities of existence, say indigenous healers. Space Holding , Zine #19 Medical , Zine #19 Lower doses better for shadow work say Jungian therapists Medical , Zine #19 ‘Psycholytic’ techniques with more practicioner involement are making a comeback. Medical , Zine #19 Integration , Zine #19 Revenge of the Shadow Integration , Zine #19 The Shadow’s back! Plus sidekicks Golden Shadow, Collective Shadow, Cultural Shadow, Anti-Shadow… Integration , Zine #19 Funnies , Zine #19 Kool-Aid Corner #19 Funnies , Zine #19 Your regular round-up of trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life. Funnies , Zine #19 My unofficial Vital Study Zine features observations from the past week’s learning and happenings in the space. The top post is a round-up. Highlights follow themed by Vital’s core learning elements: Traditional and Modern Approaches, Therapy, Space Holding, Medicine, and Integration. Plus there’s funnies at the end. This blog is not affiliated to Vital beyond my study on the course. The content shouldn’t be taken as representative as it’s a personal reflection and includes my own lived experience of the sector too.13:T10a6,My unofficial Vital Study Zine # 19 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space. This issue: Carl Jung and the shadow side of psychedelia with Drs Ido Cohen and Gita Vaid, plus The Temple of Light and more From ‘Novae’ by Lab212 Collective at Wavelength : A Momentary Spring at Beijing Times Art Museum till 1 July ‘Jung’s work reminds us that our psyches are endlessly complex systems with unfathomable capabilities for healing and growth.’ Not my own prescient words, but those of my esteemed Vital Psychedelic Training course tutor Johanna Hilla in Philosophy and Psychedelics . The seminal compilation is now available in paperback out of Exeter University, Albion . That’s where Johanna, a pioneering expert in applying Carl Jung’s psychology to psychedelic use, is based. ‘Jung’s contribution may prove essential for realising a comprehensive psychology of altered states,’ she concludes in her essay Journeying into the Realm of the Unconscious . Jung famously rejected Sigmund Freud’s focus on childhood, sexuality and biological functions. Legend has it that during a long ocean voyage spent together, the spritely Jung implied Freud’s lack of sexual experience might contribute to the significance he attached to it. Freud shall we say was triggered. Jung spiralled into a spiritual crisis, his mind blown by the realisation Freud was not only sexually repressed himself, but possibly projecting it all over human history. The son of a priest and a medium, his confusion manifested in lavish, intense visions including an especially poignant prophecy of the First World War in October 1913. From Jung’s 1962 autobiography Memories, Dreams, Reflections : ‘I saw the mighty yellow waves, the floating rubble of civilization, and the drowned bodies of uncounted thousands,’ he wrote in his memoirs, ‘Then the whole sea turned to blood. This vision last about one hour. I was perplexed and nauseated, and ashamed of my weakness. Two weeks passed; then the vision recurred, under the same conditions, even more vividly than before, and the blood was more emphasized.’ Jung did what any of us would: he comissioned a large red leather bound scrapbook, built a massive extension on his crazy villa by Lake Zurich and retired there ‘in solitude’ AKA alongside his polyamorous coterie of society beauties, to write canonical books – and paint a unique illuminated manuscript exploring his own psyche. The son of a priest and a medium favoured stuff that – a century later – would turn out to be highly appealing to us voyaging-through-the-netherworlds types. Arguably, the writing was on the wall when Jung wrote the introduction to the first-ever 1935 German edition of The Tibetan Book of the Dead , which Timothy Leary and Richard ‘Ram Dass’ Alpert would present as an LSD road manual in the 60s. His med school dissertation was written On the Psychology and Pathology of So-Called Occult Phenomena . Jung channeled the imagination to illustrate our purpose, and the route to homeostasis. He empirically examined the use of classical tools like religious texts, alchemical practices, and dream states to understand human psychology. He believed historic methods employed a metaphysical vocabulary richer than words alone. The mental health crisis is a result of these more elegant methods of understanding falling into neglect, Jung decalred. Muddied are our personal blueprints for fulfilment: ‘The will can control our impulses only in part. It may be able to suppress them, but it cannot alter their nature,’ he wrote in 1951’s Aion: Researches into the Phenomenology of the Self , ‘And what is suppressed comes up in another place, in another form, but this time loaded with a resentment that makes the otherwise harmless natural impulse our enemy.’ This issue goes Carl Jung bananas: with special guests my aforementioned teach Ms Johanna Saponnen, modern-day magus Dr Ido Cohen , and many more psychedelic thinkers who tell stories with punchlines like “You must respect the circle of life to drink ayahuasca” and “Shouldn’t we be coming up with something better than ‘just trust the inner healer’?” In this archetypal collector’s issue:14:Tbe5,Approach Carl Jung applied scientific rigour to mystic wisdom. His alternative psychology provides a framework for psychedelic integration. Only now are its most profound messages coming to light Evan Roth , ‘Landscapes’ at Wavelength: A Momentary Spring, Beijing Times Art Museum till 1 July ‘The years when I pursued my inner images were the most important time of my life. Everything else is derived from this,’ opens Jung’s masterwork The Red Book . Leading psychedelic voices say Jung’s established, if exotic, psychology provides an explanatory framework that complements and legitimises the visionary psychedelic experience. Yes, your trippy bullshit is of significance after all. ‘Godfather of Psychedelic Therapy’ Dr Stanislav Grof writes in his definitive work LSD Therapy ‘The only psychiatrist who systematically explored and described many of the transpersonal phenomena we see is Carl Gustav Jung.’ But, “It seems unlikely Jung took psychedelics” writes my Vital tutor Johanna Saponnen in Philosophy of Psychedelics (out now in paperback ). Her extensive mapping of Jung’s work comes to mixed conclusions. The acclaimed early 20th century psychologist cautioned fellow intellectuals against the mescaline trend in his correspondence. But his interest seemed piqued by LSD just before his death in 1965 aged 85. Jung believed delving into our imaginations, instincts and personal mythologies – using techniques he bastardised from alchemy and mysticism – was fraught in itself. Which is possibly fair enough. “It seems unlikely Jung took psychedelics” Whether Jung had his wings or not he certainly seemed to know his way around the astral plane, and beyond. Interpreting plus integrating dreams and visions, primeval male and female forces, kabbalistic mental alchemy, re-enchantment, re-storyfication, ‘ancestor work’ the importance of a spiritual practice and – yes – ‘the shadow’ were Jungian tropes. He said nature could ‘make us unconscious’ and warned of its potency . Jung was even into embodiment, stressing the importance of a daily yoga practice. He essentially converted to mysticism (despite doggedly maintaining an empirical attitude) after a premonition of the First World War. A spiritual crisis provoked by conflict between his scientific and spiritual sides drove him into isolation. “The only psychiatrist who explored transpersonal phenomena is Carl Gustav Jung” Therein he painted and drew, as opposed to wrote, The Red Book an illuminated train of thought manuscript exploring his most conceptual hypotheses. Jung was so conscious of its obscurity that he only showed it to a handful of confidants. This definitive work of human endeavour was finally published in… 2020. It’s not your average mash-up era comeback. And before you conclude the bookish-seeming Jung mustn’t have done his own shadow work, turns out he was a shall-we-say ‘photo polyamourist’ and college jock who swerved penury by marrying an heiress to the IWC Swiss watch dynasty.15:Tebe,Therapy Those visions and messages from the deep reflect real-world events, relationships and consequences Wangechi Mutu, ‘Yo Mama’ showing at Intertwined, the New Museum, NYC till 4 June How do Jungian interpretations of trip reports actually play out in therapy rooms? Naturally we’re all smug that canonised psychologist Carl Jung – arguably the most famous one after Sigmund Freud and y’know, Jordan Peterson – dignifies the visionary aspect of psychedelic experiences. Jung’s relational depth psychology explains the personal relevance of dreamlike imaginary narratives in his masterworks including Man and His Symbols and Archetypes of the Unconscious . But waxing lyrical on your entity encounters is a far cry from a typical talk therapy session. “It’s not always good to start diving into the archetype that penetrated their body midway through a ceremony” I asked Vital lecturer Dr Ido Cohen how he uses Jung’s psychology to help patients make sense – and use – of psychedleic experiences. “It’s important to meet people where they are,” says the accomplished Jungian analyst and scholar of indigenous shamanistic practices, “So I think first I want to listen. I want to listen to where they are, what the actual capacity, is and what the need is.” Ido, also a scholar of indigenous shamanistic practices, explains: “I have patients who I worked with for years without talking about anything like I have today. You can also have someone specifically psychedelic related, who comes back from retreat really raw and are very, very open, or very, very scared or something. So it’s not a good time for them to start diving into like the archetype they saw that penetrated their body midway through a ceremony. That’s not what they need right now.” Jung related mental health to our inner conflict with subconscious yearnings. Poignant visions from dreams or the waking ‘active imagination’ were messages from our deepest instincts, he believed. But it’s the emotional content, and the compulsions they stir, that bear most relevance. “I’m not dismissing the image: act it, treat it as though it’s real. But my game is curiosity” Those encounters with the Goddess evoke more down to earth matters. They present as deeply profound because they are wrenched from the collective unconscious, where that which is undeniably bigger-than-us dwells. “To give you an example: I worked with this young man, lovely young man, riddled with anxiety and low like low self esteem, had a strong Saturnian father, went to ceremony, came back and he’s like, You don’t you don’t understand what happened to me!’,” says Ido. He continues, “I was like, ‘What happens?’ And he paints this scene, where he was on these mountains… and he was a wolf running with a wolf pack. He’s describing this to me in vivid detail. I asked him one question: ‘How was it? How did it feel, to run with wolves?’ He said, I’ve never felt so strong. I have never felt so capable. I’ve never felt so much in my body. And I’ve never felt so free’.” The subconscious demands we confront said urges. Not by actually going feral in the woods with the pack, tempting as it remains. “You were a wolf. Consider your wolf self” But instead by transitioning from the being we are, to someone a little more like the one up on the that mountainside. “You were a wolf. I’m totally down with that. I’m not dismissing the image: act it, treat it as though it’s real,” says Ido Cohen, “But my game is curiosity… to have you consider your wolf self.” Related reading Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill W’s LSD use inspired 12-Step and cured his depression Psychedelic therapy is an art first and a science second16:Tfab,Space It’s a mistake to believe psychedelics shelter us from the realities of existence, says The Temple of Light’s Deanna Rogers From ‘Carmézia Emiliano: The Tree of Life’ at MASP till 11 June “Life in the jungle is hard. So there are different rules.” Thus speaks Deanna Rogers, facilitator at The Temple of the Way of Light in Peru . It’s a Shipibo tradition retreat centre where Bruce Parry and Jeremy Narby like to settle in for a brew and a therianthrope chit-chat. Deanna is also trauma-healing hierophant Dr Gabor Maté’s shamanic bat-woman for his own ceremonies. “We think of these healers as peaceful, enlightened beings,” says Deanna, who compares this convenient simplification to a Jungian ‘shadow’ interpretation of a more complex reality. “But they’re human and… they view it like a warrior culture,” she continues, “It’s not about peace and love. That element is there. But for some of them, it’s very much about, like… ‘We’re spiritual warriors. We go in there and go to battle’,” she explains during Vital’s special lecture series on Jungian shadow therapy. Deanna has studied with Shipibo curanderos in Peru for over a decade. “Westerners come here thinking you can heal everything with peace and love” Including in Iquitos with a tabaquero shaman, specialising in spiritual energy field defence type stuff, which is obviously sweet . “A total character,” she says, “So, I asked him one day, I don’t know if it’s good for my diet [pre and post-plant medicine fast], but last night I killed someone in my dream’.” The tabaquero threw her an animistic curve ball: “He just laughed at me and he’s like, ‘Yeah, westerners come here and they think that you can heal everything with peace and love. But sometimes you need to kill things in order to just put them back in their place.’ I was like… ‘Okay…’” Lecture host, Vital founder Kyle Buller illustrates Deanna’s point with a gory anecdote. “Sometimes you need that edge. You need to be the killer. To have that really tough, direct, clear energy” He describes a Peruvian shaman unsheathing his machete to decapitate a snake; despite protests from his Western voyagers. “Apparently he responded, ‘You must respect the circle of life to drink ayahuasca’.” There’s a ‘piece’ here, as a therapist might say, about perspective. “How it’s been shared with me,” explains Deanna, “is sometimes you need that edge. Sometimes, you need to be the killer. Sometimes you need to have that really tough, direct, clear energy.” Boundaries can be far more complex to establish than those animated CBT videos makes out. And the Sociopath Next Door , to quote the book , ‘thrives in decorum.’ Which takes fortitude to breach. “My father Timothy Leary was not a pacifist” Perhaps this is what Ernst Junger, Germany’s greatest First World War hero and coiner of the term ‘psychonaut’, was getting at when he refused to completely condemn militarism. “My father was not a pacifist,” says Zach Leary , son of Dr Timothy and MAPS podcast host , whenever he gets the opportunity. More on the arch and impenetrable art of holding Space : Featured Space Holding , The Mithoefers , Zine #12 , Vital 2.4 Drugs are the Love Space Holding , The Mithoefers , Zine #12 , Vital 2.4 MDMA for couples therapy: 4/4 octopuses can’t be wrong. Space Holding , The Mithoefers , Zine #12 , Vital 2.4 Space Holding , Ashleigh Murphy-Beiner , Zine #11 , Vital 2.3 A Love Unconditional Space Holding , Ashleigh Murphy-Beiner , Zine #11 , Vital 2.3 Wanted: open hearts to hold space over personality disorders. Space Holding , Ashleigh Murphy-Beiner , Zine #11 , Vital 2.3 Space Holding , Dr Rick Strassman , Zine #7 , Vital 1.7 Holy vape pens, Metatron! Space Holding , Dr Rick Strassman , Zine #7 , Vital 1.7 Arguing what DMT entities are is moot says Dr Strassman. Besides, they’re angels. Space Holding , Dr Rick Strassman , Zine #7 , Vital 1.717:T11a3,Medical ‘Psycholytic’ techniques with more practicioner involement are making a comeback – and suit lighter trips, claim experts ‘The Psychedelic Eye’ by John Lennon (for it is he) at Kingham lodge sculpture park Challenging shadow work is best attempted on lower doses of psychedelics with therapist guidance, say Jungian experts – in contrast to current wisdom. Dr Scott Hill’s Confrontation with the Unconscious is considered the definitive text for using Jungian psychology in psychedelic therapy and integration. Speaking in Vital’s Jungian shadow therapy lecture series, Dr Hill questioned the modern-day orthodoxy for high dose sessions: “Low doses allow us to be more conscious in the experience,” he says. While recreational MDMA users will tell you “less is more,” the modern-day psychedelic therapy circuit believes in high doses, with ‘non directional’ interaction between therapist and patient. But “People who keep coming back for high doses may struggle during integration,” Dr Hill continues, “Their experiences are so big – the ‘godhead experience’ – that they struggle to integrate into mainstream reality, and keep wanting to go back.” Dr Hill says mild doses can still trigger archetypal awareness for example. And he believes experienced users can access and navigate meaningful psychedelic states with lower doses. “High doses might avoid dealing with the shadow. Maybe that’s why they can disappoint” Just like many Peruvian shamans believe one becomes more alert to ayahuasca as use increases. (And claiming you’re ‘sensitive to the medicine’ has become a Western humblebrag). NY-based clinical psychologist Dr Gita Vaid believes intra-muscular ketamine injections can be artfully choreographed to create a specific experience for the patient. “High doses might actually be an attempt to avoid dealing with the shadow work. This is why psychedelic experiences can sometimes initially feel disappointing,” she says, “But it’s through the integration process where diamonds of insights can be mined and used for growth.” Could a skilled therapist lead the complex shadow integration that will truly satisfy patient need? “What is holding space? Is it just making sure someone’s safe or is there a process going on?” Dr Vaid proposes a re-examination of the ‘psycholytic’ therapy style featuring more interaction between your inner healer, and the outer healer sat alongside. “There’s a lot of platitudes in the psychedelic space – I don’t even know what we’re talking about anymore. What is holding space? Or what’s in that umbrella? Is it just making sure someone’s safe? Or is there a process going on? And how does one define that?” Are we just lame duck ‘shamans’ sitting there not even pretending to commune with supernatural intelligences? “Frameworks will start emerging to evolve and grow the field of psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy” What divides the psychedelic guide from the friendly barman or hairdresser, says Dr Vaid? “What constitutes the ‘psychotherapy’ part of psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy? We don’t really have the systems, the language, vocabulary or theoretical frameworks,” she says, “which I’m hoping will start emerging to actually distinguish, differentiate and get more sophisticated – evolve and grow the field.” Dr Vaid admits a lack of ambition isn’t limited to the psychedelic sector: “You even hear psychiatrists talking about sleep and exercise, which to me wouldn’t constitute psychotherapy in the first place.” More Medical articles here on New Psychonaut: Featured Medical , Dr Ben Sessa , Zine #14 , Vital 2.6 Ravers score rare victory over Mondays Medical , Dr Ben Sessa , Zine #14 , Vital 2.6 ‘Peak early and don’t skimp on quality’ is the Awakn formula to avoid MDMA comedowns. Medical , Dr Ben Sessa , Zine #14 , Vital 2.6 Medical , Dr Rick Strassman , Zine #7 , Vital 1.7 The lollipop of optimism Medical , Dr Rick Strassman , Zine #7 , Vital 1.7 The placebo effect is valid, “scientific, and real”. It could be behind the psychedelic experience. Medical , Dr Rick Strassman , Zine #7 , Vital 1.7 Medical , Dr Peter Sjöstedt-Hughes , Zine #6 , Vital 1.6 More healthy, less normal Medical , Dr Peter Sjöstedt-Hughes , Zine #6 , Vital 1.6 The performance enhancing and problem-solving powers of psychedelics are growing in legitimacy and acceptance. Medical , Dr Peter Sjöstedt-Hughes , Zine #6 , Vital 1.618:Tb92,Integration Just when you thought it was safe to step into the sunshine – the Shadow’s back! With its sidekicks Golden Shadow, Collective Shadow, Cultural Shadow, Anti-Shadow and your Anima alone knows what else… ‘Memorabilia’ by Luna Ikuta showing at Wavelength : A Momentary Spring, Beijing Times Art Museum China till 1 July Thought integrating ‘the parts of you that you’re most ashamed of and keep hidden’ was the trickiest part of Jungian shadow work? You may be unsurprised to learn that the cycles are just beginning. There’s the ‘golden shadow’. This includes the silver linings that inevitably accompany the regular shadow’s negative traits. Plus perhaps more importantly the agreeable and positive aspects that we’ve smothered. We might suppress compassionate urges to appear indifferent (hard and cool in other words). “We take the collective shadow and make it our own” Sounds reasonably clear-cut. Yet be wary of discriminating between the golden shadow and the murky, original one. “The ‘positive vibes only’ culture is anti-shadow,” says says Jungian analyst Dr Ido Cohen, lecturing in Vital’s shadow work lecture series, “what might be happening that oppresses the shadow?” That’ll be ‘the collective shadow’. It’s the one who also nailed Christ to the cross, and willingly elects dictators. “We take the collective shadow and make it our own,” Dr Cohen expands. “We can absorb the collective shadow, or become numb to it,” adds Dr Portal. Likewise we might celebrate our outsider status; just as psychonaut heads like to do. Should we attempt union? Or consolidate independence? “What does integration look like?” says Dr Ido Cohen, “Moving away from these systems and creating something new? Or is it taking pieces of the experience and carrying forth?” British christian ecologist Paul Kingsnorth has a stark view on navigating shadow work. ‘Sacrifice and surrender are at the heart of faiths,’ he points out, ‘Nobody wants this. But maybe it’s what we have to do?’ Serving up more Integration articles here on New Psychonaut: Featured Integration , Dr Charles Nichols , Zine #16 , Vital 4.1 Transcendental family systems Integration , Dr Charles Nichols , Zine #16 , Vital 4.1 Ready for ceremonies with you, mum and dad, the grandparents plus your kids and even the dog? Integration , Dr Charles Nichols , Zine #16 , Vital 4.1 Integration , Dr Ben Sessa , Zine #14 , Vital 2.6 Where social services are the new gods Integration , Dr Ben Sessa , Zine #14 , Vital 2.6 Atheists need answers from their insights too. So do jedis. And children in care. Integration , Dr Ben Sessa , Zine #14 , Vital 2.6 Integration , Dr Rick Strassman , Zine #7 , Vital 1.7 Peak sexual experience Integration , Dr Rick Strassman , Zine #7 , Vital 1.7 DMT could be key to women’s earth-shattering cervical ‘full body’ orgasms. Integration , Dr Rick Strassman , Zine #7 , Vital 1.719:T7ef,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Gaika , ‘Convo 2.2 Complex Confessional’ Graph of the Week There’s no healing without clearing. Nor chanting. Spirits neither Zuzanna Sadowska , social anthropologist and PhD candidate at the Polish Academy of Sciences speaking at Breaking Convention 2023 My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. This week: The Golden Bough by James George Frazer – new full edition It’s pretty new and I got it for Christmas but it’s £14.99 from Waterstone’s The forst full version of the Victorian pop-anthropology classic has all the most triggering ideas in one volume. The Golden Bough continues to outrage audiences, as it pricks the Western world’s lack of humility. Not only by illustrating how indigenous customs reflect timeless values, but also by suggesting rituals we label ‘savage’ are played out in cultures who consider themselves eminently more civilised. It’s where Robert Graves found divine inspiration for The White Goddess, René Girard gave Fraser props in Things Unsaid Since the Beginning for the World. Lovecraft seized on its air of intefatigable, ancient ambivalence his mythos. Wittgenstein wrote a book deploring its colourfully gory naturalistic nihilism, and The Golden Bough appears on Colonel Kurtz’s bedside table in Apocalypse Now . Fraser bottled it back in the day, but this collection features his punchline – Christ’s crucifixion was basically a human sacrifice. Editor Robert Fraser’s based at my own alma mater, University of London’s Royal Holloway College (RHC) – described as “a party university” by one of my Vital tutors (yes indeed). Despite its non-intentional reputation RHC, nestled in leafy Surrey, attracts thrusting minds like sex and drugs researcher Alex Aldrydge plus Vital lecturer Ashleigh Murphy-Beiner , joining the likes of Dystopia author Gregory Claeys (who taught me Victorian philosophy). Related reading Kool-Aid Corner #1 Kool-Aid Corner1a:T1190,My unofficial Vital Study Zine # 18 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space From Transcendent Country of the Mind by Sari Soninen published by The Eriskay Collection ‘Integration is something that the psychedelic space talks about a lot, without ever going into detail about what it is.’ Thjat’s according to Jungian psychoanalyst Scott J Hill in his seminal work, Confrontation with the Unconscious: Jungian Depth Psychology and Psychedelic Experience . (On which topic, much more later down the line). And it’s fair to say that early integration programs were pretty toss: some progressive psychotherapy here, some wellbeing basics there, plus some toned-down underground and/or Groffian tactics drip-fed to the receptive. To be fair, rectifying the psychedelic experience and life in post-industrial society is hard enough as it is. Helping a vulnerable individual to navigate it while reamaining within the bounds of a socially acceptable therapeutic practice arguably more so. Nonethless, unprepared clinical trial psychologiosts and wellbeing hustlers in plausible knitwear alike mostly ended up fruitlessly recommending meditation apps to mind-blown metropoles, after they’d seen ayahuasca on Netflix and naively presumed it’d be like that immersive Salvador Dali show . “No dramatic life changes within the first fortnight” Psychedelic integration therapy was showing the whole space up, frankly. So fair play to Vital Psychedelic Training headmaster and consciousness thought leader Kyle Buller. He took time to assemble a worthwhile integration manual while interning at MAPS, and presented on the topic to begin Module Five of Vital’s year-long psychedelic training programme. Even for total edgelords, actual integration is not to be sniffed at. Because it concerns the subject of… making your trip go on forever . Sort of. The golden you who blossoms under the medicine can be ‘integrated’ to a certain extent. Using techniques like Jungian depth analysis, those seemingly fantastical visions can be understood as unconscious guidance; in a similar manner to dreams. This is good news for those of us who receive a sensation along the lines of ‘Why are you worrying about that? Think about this, ’ when we run our carefully prepared list of neuroses – ‘intentions’ – past the medicine. Likewise, going for a walk in the woods while listening to John Hopkins does help one not feel so shitty to be back in reality. Troopers like Dr Sam Gandy (coming up later in the integration module) have got stats on the benefits of setting trippers free into nature . Which is the one thing us recreational yobs could’ve told you about integration. (Back the outlaw days we made do with a KLF CD , David Lynch’s version of Dune and lashings of soap bar .) Guess what also helps with your psychedleic integration? Meditation, which, long story short, aids effective neuroplasticity, clarity and homeostasis. It’s all in this laudable round-up paper from Geoff J. Bathje out of Chicago’s Adler University, Psychedelic integration: An analysis of the concept and its practice . And here’s my edit of Top Integration Tips from the week’s barrage of alternative self-improvement intel. And remember everyone – “No dramatic life changes within the first fortnight following the experience,” says Kyle, “…preferably longer.” These five items I pulled from the week’s research are themed along Vital’s natural element-themed structure. Air provides an overview of psychedelic use, Fire concerns therapeutic applications, Water covers ‘space holding’ – the art of keeping it together, Earth is where you’ll find medical matters, and E t h e r discusses integration, the process of bringing psychedelic power into regular life . Featured Into the Unknown? Your voyager no idea what to expect? Whip up a quick mock ceremony for a taste of the sacred and profane. Attention Ideology Someone to listen to our trippy BS is often all we want when we first get back to Earth. Calling Interdimensional Rescue Crisis management is the reality of integration therapy. And this is what it looks like. Wavy Garms What the modern-day professional psychopomp is wearing this season. Heoric Doses of Reality Peak existence is the new peak experience, says 5-MEO DMT expert Dr Malin Vedøy Uthaug. Kool-Aid Corner #18 Your regular round-up of trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life.1b:T9f7,Approach Virgin voyagers come to psychedelic specialists for advice on what to expect. Break them in gently with a mock psychedelic ceremony Casa Organica , Mexico City “Some people don’t know enough about set or setting,” says Dr Kyle Buller, while lecturing his Vital students on the reality of providing a psychedelic integration therapy service. Edgelords like us might consider it borderline basic to bust out the tarot cards. But this is the general public we’re taking out to the edges of consciousness here. It’s probably a good idea to ease them into the whole tripping thing kind-of gradually. Kyle’s trade secret solution? A mock min-ceremony. “You can run, say, a thirty minute breathwork session to find out what clients are comfortable with,” he advises the seasoned transpersonal therapist, cannily. Sensing out what trippy vibes a virgin voyager’s into – and which they’re decidedly against – could make the difference between them bathing in transcendent bliss – or suffering a total bummer. How much woo-woo does the client fancy during their experience on a scale of one to ten? Perhaps world music reminds them of their dad? Does incense give them a headache? “Some people simply don’t like those strong smells,” says Kyle. And may their taste be better suited to a jungle retreat than a western clinic? All this even before we get on to the hugging or not thing. “A set-up of a ceremony is also a good opportunity to show them how to breathe through difficulty, how to intensify the experience, how to titrate it” Nervy initiates might just answer ‘I don’t mind’ when asked what their preferences might be, whether they’re deciding which exotic plant medicine to choose from, or how to set out their lounge before a Bloombox-style at-home medical experience. But their subconscious might be more assertive, once unleashed. And decide it’s really triggered by classical religious music like an Arvo Part composition say, when you didn’t even twig it was a christian jam. Or they may seriously not like being touched when they’re coming up, and dislike even a supportive pat on the shoulder. “A set-up of a ceremony is also a good opportunity them show to breathe through difficulty, how to intensify the experience, how to titrate it,” says the seasoned transpersonal therapist and Vital course leader. Easy on the sacred tobacco. Related reading Are ‘corporadelics’ doing enough for set, setting… and society? Saving lost souls for three million years. And now with MDMA1c:T5c6,Therapy Someone to listen to our trippy BS is often all we want when we first get back to Earth From Transcendent Country of the Mind by Sari Soninen published by The Eriskay Collection Like all things consciousness-expansion related any integration practice will be highly subjective, and complex. And somehow, simultaneously, dazzlingly, beautifully simple. Vital students, including storied specialists, were in agreement as to what many voyagers seek from their post-trip debriefs. “Just being witnessed, or seen, or heard, is so paramount,” says one wise Vital student in the question and answer session after Kyle Buller’s lecture to open Vital’s training module on psychedelic integration. “Just be open, without really much of any judgment, or even too much feedback” Indeed Dr Timothy Leary, for it is he, wrote in The Politics of Ecstasy, ‘Close your eyes and listen… and learn that it’s the oldest message of love and peace and laughter.’ Another Vital learner, recently returned from retreat, says of his own touchdown: “It’s very important for the listener to just be open, without really much of any judgment, or even too much feedback.” So, do say: ‘Wow’. Don’t say: ‘Rr… right.’ Conversation stopper: ‘I think you should stop hanging out with those people.’ Related reading Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill W’s LSD use inspired 12-Step and cured his depression Psychedelic therapy is an art first and a science second1d:T7bc,Space Crisis management is the reality of integration therapy, professionals say From Transcendent Country of the Mind by Sari Soninen published by The Eriskay Collection Lisbon-based psychotherapist Marc Aixala says the reality of psychedelic integration is most clients come seeking help, having a bad time of some description. “So my expertise is more focused on people in difficulties,” Aixala told Vital lecturer Kyle Buller on the Psychedelics Today podcast : “When I talk about integration, that’s what I’m referring to the most.” Aixala crunched the data on years of psychedelic damage limitation. The most common issues are presented in his book Psychedelic Integration out now. “Psychedelics teach us that the greatest healer is in ourselves” Among the top comedown crises: anxiety and insomnia obviously; struggling to process what emerged from the experience; inner conflict with an instruction supposedly delivered from on high; actual flashbacks and HPPD; reality breakdown; plus good old edgy, lingering discomfort. “Don’t create a need for integration in people that don’t have it” Apportioning blame, Aixala’s figures cite lack of suitable preparation, exacerbation of existing mental health issues, dodgy healers, and what Aixala calls “Repeated intakes without integration, a new trend in which people go from experience to experience. They for instance care more about transpersonal entities, losing reality in quite a severe way.” Of depth work, journaling, downloading-but-never-using meditation apps, and the other trappings of vanilla, middle class ‘integration’ Aixala says: “Most of the time we can do that on our own.” The former telephone engineer adds, “I’m careful as a therapist not to create an additional need for integration in people that don’t have it. One of the things that psychedelics teaches us, is that greatest healer is in ourselves.” Related reading Can you hold your own? Cosmic Midwifery1e:T960,Medical What the modern-day professional psychopomp is wearing this season Not this, unfortunately. It’s from ‘Ikon’ by Nick Knight available now In his definitive book Psychedelic Renaissance , Dr Ben Sessa of Bristol’s Awakn Clinics writes: “An unfortunate but necessary truth is that profession­als working in this field must remain as boring and staid as possible.” No ceremonial robes allowed? What’s the sartorially minded integration coach to do? Faced by this matter of cosmic import, I turned to Vital’s students for answers after Kyle Buller’s lecture on ‘psychedelic integration’. Which is, for the uninitiated, ‘the process by which a psychedelic experience translates into positive changes in daily life.’ “I’m a professional therapist and I’ve got tattoos on knuckles and neck,” says my Vital colleague Mackenzie Amara . Also from ‘Ikon’ by Nick Knight available now “My image filters out the people that would be distracted by that,” says the head-turning Jungian depth psychologist, based in Zurich. Though, “the flipside is more likelihood of extreme projections” she says, referring to a client’s tendency to act out behaviour patterns on their therapist… that’s often intensified in psychedelic sessions. “Image considerations are more about what projections you might be managing” Sporting a strong look might muddy the astral airwaves once the archetypes start flying: “Image considerations are less about fitting in with the crowd, and more about what projection you might be managing,” Mackenzie advises. The general concensus from the students is that the culture behind whatever medicine’s going down can be respected in the ceremony. Personally I take that as a green light for cloaks and headdresses. Also from ‘Ikon’ by Nick Knight available now You’re not at an after party, though. Even the most progressive psychedelic ceremonies demand some decorum. “It goes back to: how much are we influencing people?” says integration lecturer and Vital founder Kyle Buller, “I wanted to wear a shirt in our last Jamaica retreat of this reindeer eating a mushroom. And I was, like… maybe I’ll save that and just wear something bland…” Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment1f:T945,Integration Peak existence is the new peak experience, says 5-MEO DMT expert Dr Malin Ved ø y Uthaug By Trulee Hall from ‘Plays on Foreplays’, at Rusha & Co, Los Angeles , February 4 till March 11, 2023 The strictest lesson psychedelics taught me, is that they themselves are not important. It’s lived experience that is. I don’t mean a Fabulous Furry Freak Brothers existence. (Although I am all for that too, especially as part of some ‘path of excess leading to the palace of wisdom’ thing). I mean stuff like Dr Malin Vedøy Uthaug does. The 5-MEO DMT research maven took up free diving while stuck in, y’know, Egypt during the COVID-19 pandemic. “I believe our society has emotional constipation. We need to get that shit out” This helped over come her fear of deep open water – ‘thalassophobia’ – and since she’s set two free diving records in her native Norway. “I believe our society has emotional constipation. We need to get that shit out,” says the firebrand, who’s swift to remind us that “different diets lead to a different psychedelic experience,” certainly according to plant medicine purists. This is felt on the material plane: “Putting the body back into the equation, is the way forward,” Dr Uthaug claims. This could mean bioenergetic therapy to encourage consciousness ‘integration’ on a physical level. Or… actually doing things as opposed to just talking about them . “Changes need to be actively translated into your life,” says Dr Uthaug… which admittedly is likely to mean unexpected challenges, hard truths, and personal growth generally earned the hard way as per usual. “In the light of day, insights are about lifestyle” The trip is only part of the healing. You do the rest with the actions you undertake. That the mushroom or whatever told you to do. “A more holistic framework is what I’d love to see going forward, here in the space,” says Dr Uthaug, “Take an exaggerated example: when an addict take a psychedelic, they realise, oh, I shouldn’t be taking this substance anymore because it fucks me up, right? And so in the light of day, insights are about lifestyle.” Ceremony in Jamaica with Sacred Transitions Retreats and New Psychonaut Treasure Beach ‘The Cornwall of Jamaica’ is where I’d send anyone close to me pondering a first experience. Take a look.20:T5eb,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Walter Van Beirendonck autumn/winter 23/24 collection shown at Paris Men’s Fashion Week Graph of the Week This is how it works apparently: FIGURE 1: ‘Molecular, cellular, and systems support for psychedelic-induced long-term changes..’ From: Catalysts for change: the cellular neurobiology of psychedelics (Matthew I. Banks, Zarmeen Zahid, Nathan T. Jones, Ziyad W. Sultan, and Cody J. Wenthur, William Bement, Monitoring Editor) Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol. 32, No. 12 My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. This week: Games People Play by Eric Berne 1968 Penguin edition! £3 from the second hand bookstore round the back of the sea front in historic Clevedon, North Somerset UK The first ever pop psychology book (although written for pros) debuted in 1964. In Berne’s ‘transactional analysis’ some human behaviours are learned strategies to elicit a response. (They’re mostly along the parent-child-adult drama triangle lines). Others find it exhausting, but the comfortable thing is to play along. ‘White moves first, and white usualy wins,’ writes Berne. Both the author, and our rational grown-up instincts, offer methods to dodge white’s curved balls. But he solemnly warns that all manner of pitfalls face those who refuse to play games. For example, white will not give up. They will simply find somebody else to play with. Related reading Kool-Aid Corner #1 Kool-Aid Corner21:T10bd,Are your voyagers taking their clothes off – or Goddess knows what else – in your ceremonies and sessions? And it can’t necessarily be brushed off lightly? Annie Boheler knows the score. Annie’s a somatic experiencing practicioner who’s building a framework for sex positivity during a sesh.  A classmate of mine on Vital Psychedelic Training, she’s also a trained herbalist, a somatic intimacy coach, a declared anarchist and a former erotic dancer. “There's all sorts of things that could come up,” says California’s Annie Boheler of the great unspoken topic in many therapy rooms, let alone psychedelic ones… the sexual self. Even if we’re not ‘going there’ as such, “Someone could be like, ‘I'm gonna take off all my clothes,’ because of any reason on psychedelics,” Annie reminds us, “Like, ‘There's a bee in my clothes,’ or ‘Fuck society, I'm taking off my clothes’.”  Find out more on Annie's website www.loveagesomatics.com on Instagram @rewildingintimacy “It could be nonsexual, but very intimate too,” sagely advises the sexuality, intimacy and relationship coach who’s learned with The Kinsey Institute , and Somatic Experiencing International . What’s the sex positive psychedelic therapist or guide to do in this situation fraught with a heroic dose of awkwardness? Besides stay up on the trends . The tactics Annie suggests form the basis of her upcoming sex positivity training program. They include chatting over beforehand what options you both have if, for example, the voyager wants to go one further from stripping off and start, y’know, playing with themselves (it could happen).  It doesn’t say anything about that in The Tibetan Book of the Dead (the actual one, I think it does a bit in the Leary one). “An increased capacity, awareness, and ease with discomfort can help us feel a bit more in control of a psychedelic experience” Such an incident could be just the beginning of a shame reinforcing downwards sex spiral. What’s the most deft response? Can you just leave them alone for ten minutes, with a gentle “I support you being yourself” like Annie offers as one option? Or is that not safe, so you’ve made clear that it’s not the done thing in your shared holistic therapy rooms during the prep sessions? And even the most agile surfers of inner space might struggle to navigate that little chat. “Once again, it’s about explicitly naming it: ‘Hey, we're about to talk about something really intimate. And for you this is only our first time meeting. So you only share what you want; there’s no pressure,’ or saying, ‘I do this for my work, you know, it's very comfortable for me. And there's no problem that it seems a little bit new for you. That's okay.” “Somatics means mind body connection in from the perspective of therapeutics, with a goal of healing or growing” ‘Attunement’ is the somatic experiencing (‘SE’) skill of “kind of being able to see and reflect this person's energy: if they’re more reserved, or they're really excited to share.” The next-level emotional intelligence – EQ – which SE cultivates has relevant uses, says Annie. “If we have some experience with somatics, or somatic experiencing, we've increased our internal capacity to be with emotions in general, whether they're comfortable or uncomfortable,” advises Annie, “ during a psychedelic experience, that increased capacity can allow us to have a bit more, I guess, ‘control’ – because of that awareness, and comfortability with discomfort.” Embodiment therapies and upbeat approaches like Adrienne Maree Brown’s emergent strategy and ‘pleasure activism’ make enjoying yourself somehow socially acceptable and subversive, simultaneously: both lust and appreciation for life. “Somatics means mind body connection in from the perspective of therapeutics, with a goal of healing or growing,” says Annie, “’Somatic experiencing’ is orienting around our senses: sensations, the temperature of the air, emotions, visualisations, any impulse to move. If we slow down enough, we can tune into these different things. There’s no right or wrong way.” Find out more on Annie's website www.loveagesomatics.com on Instagram @rewildingintimacy22:T17b4,My unofficial Vital Study Zine # 17 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space From Highlights of the Convergence, a new immersive exhibition for the visually impaired, open now at Meow Wolf , Denver, Colorado “I want to be a steward for reality,” declares clinical psychologist Dr Adele La France. The effervescent Dr La France is famously ‘based’. She cracks off her talk to Vital students about the practicalities – the reality if you will – of psychedelic therapy by explaining how she was generally anti-psychedelic drugs, until she experienced them in a medical context. Her clinician’s manner is a masterclass in marrying authority, whimsy and vision. She’s the co-creator of Emotion Focussed Family Therapy ; her clinical manual on it is published by the notoriously hard-to-please American Psychological Association. Dr Lafrance’s new book What to Say to Kids When Nothing Seems to Work: A Practical Guide for Parents and Caregivers is out now at a family-friendly price. While toiling at the sharp end of mental health, she’s spoken convincingly (and warmly) about topical issues like taking ayahuasca to heal eating disorders on Emmy Award-winning daytime TV show The Doctors , and video game addiction on CBS. She’s currently working as clinical investigator and strategy lead at MAPS’ study of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for eating disorders, and as clinical support on Imperial College London’s study for psilocybin and anorexia nervosa . Maybe because Dr Lafrance has actually been conducting psychedelic therapy while the rest of us are debating its finer points, the softly-outspoken clinician has junked some of the practice’s outdated rhetoric. “Oftentimes they’ll be rewarded with amazing insights in the bathroom” Like its reluctance to let voyagers take a pee, lest a break for ‘voiding’ stops them from ‘surrendering to the medicine’. “If they’re doing work that feels really meaningful, clients may get conflicted about going to the bathroom. But my stance is that the meeting of physiological needs is the most important,” she says, “After all, Abram Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs would say insights are great, but engaging consistently in meeting physical needs is fundamental.” According to Dr Lafrance there are all sorts of other advantages to be discovered when trippers stumble to the lavatory. “Oftentimes they’ll be rewarded with amazing insights in the bathroom,” she says, and it’s true ablutions are managed by the right brain, hence Pythagoras’ eureka-in-the-bath moment. Things clicked for Dr Lafrance – “ Adele , please” she urges Vital students – in a ‘patient experience’ she had a while taking part in an MDMA safety trial. Dr Adele La France “It happened to me when I was part of an MDMA study for health controls,” she confesses, “I went to the bathroom to pee. But I was working on something, and I couldn’t wait to finish it up and get back. So I was pee-ing in a pressured way… I can’t believe I’m sharing this… anyways… I realised, for fuck’s sake’s – I couldn’t even pee in peace . I’m so focussed on productivity and getting things done, that I can’t even pee at a rate that is organic! That revelation was life-changing. Now I never want to multi-task ever again. It’s self injury!” It is indeed. But there’s even more to a mindful tinkle than flushing out the pipes, psychic or otherwise. “If we all heal the split between our mind and our body, not only are we more attuned to when we need to void or eat, we’re more attuned to our instincts,” advises the working psychedelic clinician, “and reconnecting with their instincts the greatest gift we can give our clients.” Homeostasis for everyone. And, risk of multi-tasking aside, Adele has further intentions: she’s grown psychedelic therapy into a fresh model, ‘theoretically informed’ psychedelic therapy, incorporating her angle of emotion processing. “A sign of emotional maturity is the capacity to hold anger and love at the same time” She’ll apparently be presenting this next year in 2023, and gave the Vital cohort a sneak peek. “I am committed to reality,” she reminds us, “meaning, actively letting go of blame narratives and fantasy as a tool for human relationships. A sign of emotional maturity is the capacity to hold anger and love at the same time, reckoning with the complexity of human relationships.” Watch Adele talking to Gabor Maté on behalf of Chacruna and more including her talks for MAPS on my New Psychonaut YouTube lecture library type thing . Here’s what’s in this week’s issue of your frank but friendly Vital Student Zine , themed along Vital Psychedelic Training’s core pillars of study. Air provides an overview of psychedelic use, Fire concerns therapeutic applications, Water covers ‘space holding’ – the art of keeping it together, Earth is where you’ll find medical matters, and E t h e r discusses integration, the process of bringing psychedelic power into regular life . Featured The Feeling Theory Dr Lafrance mixes up emotion focussed therapy with a ‘theoretically informed’ treatment room style. This requires interacting with the patient – in stark contrast to the ‘non directive’ approach considered sacrosanct… Four Times You Probably Should Intervene with the Voyager’s Experience Frontline clinical psychologist Dr Lafrance answers the big question: if the patient’s tripping balls, when does the therapist definitely need to get involved? Don’t Go There Dr Lafrance doesn’t insist that patients ‘surrender to the medicine’ when they’re not up for a challenging experience. Anger is an NRG Take a (small) step closer to the dark side for more assertiveness and self-compassion. Trip for me babe… trip for you? One week in the jungle and your relationship might never be the same… Kool-Aid Corner #17 Your regular round-up of trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life.23:T1887,Approach Dr Lafrance mixes up emotion focussed therapy with a ‘theoretically informed’ treatment room style – that involves interacting with the patient By Nokukhanya Langa showing at Saatchi Yates gallery, London till November 22 “There’s been an evolution in psychedelic therapy, says Dr Lafrance, “I’m presenting all this next year, so you’re getting a sneak preview.” Contemporary psychedelic medicine began with ‘experience’ sessions were ‘non-directed’, that is, given as little intervention as possible. ( Psycholitic is the name given to experiences where talk therapy takes place). Soon they became ‘inner directed’ encouraging the voyager to get in touch with their ol’ inner healer. But now, “We’re moving towards a theoretically informed way of being in the treatment room,” Dr Lafrance reports, “especially when the inner healing intelligence is most active.” If like me you’re wondering what ‘theoretically informed’ means, well, from my Googling I figure it’s an academic term for ‘rooted in reality’ and usually involves some form of research and sense-checking from folks actually doing the thing in question . For instance: one paper I found, which researched ways to encourage intravenous drug users to be tested for hepatitis C, insisted it employed ‘evidence based and theoretically informed techniques’ gleaned from social workers. Dr Lafrance later describes herself as “a theory-based person” and I for one will happily accept her theories when it comes to ‘ways of being in the treatment room’, because she’s been a top-flight clinical psychologist for decades. “They indulge in maladaptive coping behaviours and problematic relationships to cope… or risk more serious mind fractures” The bubbly brainbox is also a renowned expert on Emotion Focussed Therapy (EFT); she’s the author of Emotion Focused Family Therapy: A Transdiagnostic Caregiver Focused Guide , published by the redoubtable American Psychological Association. According to The International Centre for Excellence in Emotionally Focused Therapy (ICEEFT) website , EFT is closely related to John Bowlby’s Attachment Theory of Human Relationships. ‘Attachment views human beings as innately relational, social and wired for intimate bonding with others,’ it reads, ‘The EFT model prioritises emotion and emotional regulation as the key organising agents in individual experience and key relationship interactions.’ Dr Lafrance says EFT focusses on emotion regulation and processing: “If they have low skills regulating emotions and stressors, and their resources are insufficient, they have to indulge in maladaptive coping behaviours and problematic relationships in order to cope – or they risk more serious mind fractures.” In the EFT model, seemingly destructive patterns like addiction fend off worse outcomes like suicide. “You get this activated self rising like a phoenix. And it’s freaking awesome” Addicition’s an example of a coping mechanism that’s arisen to swamp the torturous emotional quagmire within. “Cross-diagnostically patients have problems with identifying and processing emotions,” says Dr Lafrance, “the symptoms are thought to be emotion regulation strategies. But if we can offer them support, including in strengthening their emotion regulation and processing skills, they receive co-regulation that in turn leads to self-regulation. Then they don’t need the coping patterns. It’s tackling the problem from the inside out.” “The key term,” says Dr Lafrance, “is self-efficacy,” meaning the power to deal with things yourself. “If you feel it with emotion processing,” she claims, “it’s incredible armour for the challenges of life: both the skills, and the support it provides.” Our emotional landscapes, though, can be foggy territory. Dr Lafrance has even felt the compulsion to hold free public workshops helping the great unwashed map out their own internal geography. Many of us are simply not literate enough to know that behind the emotion of ‘sadness’ there’s a need for ‘comfort’ from another – the common reaction is to withdraw for time alone instead. “Which emotional states do they find most challenging to identify, label, meet and need?” advises Dr Lafrance, “Stick with the sense of helplessness and that turns into ‘it’s not fair!’ And then there’s a healthy rising up of assertiveness . Latch on to something, work with it in specifics ways that help it along, and you get this activated self rising like a phoenix. And it’s freaking awesome,” she says. As a people we’re so emotionally retarded that Dr Lafrance has found it’s sometimes best to simplify troubled emotions down into two categories. “In the past when I would’ve said ‘Feel into that space with me’ now I’d just say, let’s not go there if you’re not sure” ‘Anger, resentment and disappointment’ indicate a client who shies away from vulnerability. ‘Anxiety, sadness and despair’ point to low assertiveness. But “hate and resentment can feel like a comfy blankety” advises Dr Lafrance: “Some people subconsciously live their lives by the mantra ‘I’d rather die than feel’,” she says. This is where “accessing and understanding the genus of their difficulties” comes in. “One patient told me that their medicine sessions were the first time they’d sat in fear and sadness with memories they were trying to hide from,” she explains, adding that psychedelics can quieten a harsh inner critic that usually directs repressed feelings towards their holder, away from the recognition of painful events. But, “EFT is less about the memories than it is about processing,” says Dr Lafrance, “they’re regulating, avoiding or suppressing affective material. Understanding the pattern can diffuse shame and assist in moving through the emotion.” To quote humanist psychologist Carl Rogers: ‘Once an experience is fully in awareness, fully accepted, then it can be coped with effectively, like any other clear reality.’ Related reading Are ‘corporadelics’ doing enough for set, setting… and society? Saving lost souls for three million years. And now with MDMA24:Te90,Therapy Frontline clinical psychologist answers the big question: when the patient’s tripping balls, when does the therapist definitely need to get involved? From The Order of the Fool Street Tarot exhibition in Manchester ‘This level of reality should be the new standard being applied to therapy in general’ says a Vital cohort colleague in praise of Dr Lafrance’s theoretically informed approach. “It’s different to how we were trained!” replied the respected frontline clinical psychologist. Like you can read about in the Approach section this issue, she combines emotion-focussed therapy with a ‘theoretically informed’ style taking cues from lived experiences received in the treatment rooms. This not only contrasts with bureaucratic doctrine, that favours centralised top-down wisdom… which can take decades to catch up with what’s happening on the ground. It’s also at odds the non-directive or ‘inner directed’ approach pioneered by Dr Stanislav Grof (for it is he) which insists on more delicate interaction with the therapist during the psychedelic experience itself, to encourage a more detailed internal dialogue. “I do warn them in advance that they’ll be more aware than I am” That’s the the way psychedelic therapy is going though, Dr Lafrance claims. Those of us who were only just getting the hang of being non-directive may be left a-flutter by this sudden change in er, direction. So Dr Lafrance has kindly detailed the when’s and why’s of sticking your oar in during the voyager’s experience. “We still intervene in a relational, emotion-focused, and inner-directed way,” she comments in her Vital lecture profiling the emotion-focused, theoretically informed style. Dr Lafrance’s reasons for chipping in? Conflict with parts of the self. Maladaptive emotions like anxiety and self-criticism. Anticipated shame and regret, along the lines of ‘I can’t believe I told you that, it’s supposed to be a secret.’ And, reluctance. Each must be handled gingerly, and always in the context of the medicine experience – hence ‘inner directed’ still, prompting the patient to look inside themselves, still. To confirm if your planned intervention is indeed worthwhile, confer with the handy acronym WAIT – ‘why am I talking?’ “We make a deal in the container that I’m always fine” For instance: when confronted by the thought of a sober therapist and spangled patient, an old tripping pal of mine asked, “What happens when they realise they’re taking care of you ?” He was offering up a psychedelic riddle-cum-truism. But it does happen according to Dr Lafrance albeit more prosaically. “I do warn them in advance that they’ll be more aware than I am,” says Dr Lafrance, “We make a deal in the container [agreed-upon boundaries of behaviour while tripping] that I’m always fine.” Because when patients suddenly start insisting that you go outside for a smoke, grab a coffee, or take some time to yourself “it can be reassuring to just say that you are” says Dr Lafrance. “But it can be more rewarding to go into that place,” she advises, “is there a process of caretaking that needs looking into?’ Tell them that you’re always comfortable, they don’t need to worry if you’re hungry because it’s been four hours.” Otherwise, go get that brew now “Or it may feel like a violation.” Uncharacteristic behaviour can be examined by gently pointing out that “It’s so wonderful to get to know this part of you… feels like it’s a part that really need to show itself?” That attentive, experience-led vibe seems to be sweet spot of ‘theoretically-informed, inner-led, emotion-focussed therapy.’25:Tb32,Space Dr Lafrance doesn’t insist that patients ‘surrender to the medicine’ when they’re not up for a challenging experience By Thomas Houseago now showing with… Nick Cave and Brad Pitt at Sarah Hilden Museum , Tampere, Finland till 15 Jan 2023 In her preparatory sessions with clients, Dr Lafrance asks them what level of intensity they’re prepared to face. “What if a wariness of some feelings is an expression of the inner healer?” the storied clinical psychologist who “aims to be a steward of reality” asks Vital students, in her lecture on frontline applications of psychedelic therapy. And she doesn’t insist upon ‘surrender to the medicine.’ “Any opportunity for pro-active shame work we will take,” she points out, “but if someone is expressing reluctance about pushing through, we’ll wait. This contrasts with prevailing psychedelic wisdom/gubbins, which practically demands patients stare directly into the eyes of any monsters: “In the past I would’ve said ‘feel into the space with me’ now I’d just say ‘No, let’s not go there if you’re not sure’,” Dr Lafrance reports. “What if a wariness of some feelings is an expression of the inner healer?” This ‘self interrupter’ part that forbids examination of traumatic feelings (especially when tripping balls) “was downloaded for a reason,” says Dr Lafrance, “Let’s respect it and go slow because that in itself can be powerful… by helping them be less afraid in the future.” So she’s fine with patients telling jokes, “which is awesome for people who have problems expressing joy and flexibility.” Dr Lafrance even gives a pass to ‘spiritual bypassing’ which as far as I can tell means ‘having any sort of trip that isn’t a clinical healing-type one’. Those, as Vital students have been repeatedly told by big dogs like Dr Bill Richards, aren’t ever worth banking on anyway. “Therapy comes more from process than outcome in the session” Indeed be wary of any dramatic, sudden, supposed healing advises Dr Lafrance. “If they realise they’ll feel bad tomorrow for acting out of the ordinary, that’s a sign it might be time to work with the shame. But if they’re throwing all their clothes off and shouting ‘I’m so sick of hating my body!’ it might be worth asking them what ‘Tomorrow You’ is going to think of all this. They realise you’re not trying to shame them. And they’re very grateful.” Dr Lafrance even assures patients not to feel they have to talk about things they really don’t want to. This is because “therapy comes more from process than outcome in the session,” she explains, “how did they engage with the parts of themselves and the therapist? That creates a different framework for engaging with the world.” Related reading Can you hold your own? Cosmic Midwifery26:Te38,Medical How to take a (small) step closer to the dark side for more assertiveness and self-compassion Adam Neate, ‘Retrato’ available from Flurorescent Smogg The reconstructed self doesn’t take any crap. “Assertion is a common after-effect of medicine work,” says Dr Lafrance coyly, in her eye-opening lecture to Vital students on hw psychedelic therapy goes down in the real. Like the article says over in the Approach section of Zine #17 here, Dr Lafrance says therapists see two secondary emotions most commonly in the field. “Empowerment skills, when they’ve perhaps not been done before, are usually too mousey… or too much” Those two feelings she hears about the most are sadness, as one might expect from the depressed, and rage. “Anger is a challenge for many people,” says Dr Lafrance, “but not all anger is destructive. There is healthy anger.” This more righteous kind of fury can often be confused, shall we say, with assertiveness. “Culturally we really struggle,” comments Dr Lafrance, “I’ve been in therapy for 20 years working on my capacity for anger, standing up for myself, and asking what I need.” The rage-fuelled are shying away from vulnerability according to emotion focussed therapy, and it “shows up as these problematic reactions that fuel expression of symptoms,” says the clinical psychologist, somewhat eupehmistically. “Empowerment skills, when they’ve perhaps not been done before, are usually too ‘mousey’, or too much,” explains the blonde boffin, “plus the most predictable reaction to unexpected criticism is defensiveness.” Dr Lafrance provides scripted frameworks for the budding bearish buccaneer. “I always assume user error. You know, because it helps me to cultivate more sophisticated skill” She’s kind enough to share one with Vital students during the post-lecture Q&A, when I ask about help with my own fermenting… assertiveness. “I always assume user error. You know, because it helps me to cultivate more sophisticated skill,” she advises. “If I’m expressing assertion, especially if it’s in a relationship where it’s kind of a novel experience, and it doesn’t go well… then I ask myself: ‘What am I doing or not doing to contribute to this problem?’” That’s how she hit on the idea of detailled advice for pateints fumbling their way into self-confidence. “I was encouraging people to express assertion, and it’s not going well. So then I, as a therapist, asked myself ‘How did I contribute to that?’ Like, ‘Oh, shit, we didn’t warn them.’ So I wrote, I wrote the script now that I give to all the clients.” And it goes a little something like this: ‘I realised that I don’t always say or tell the truth about how I feel. Or about what I need. It’s hurting me. And I realise that makes it so that I’m not always honest in relationships. Because I’m scared that I’ll lose people important to me. Including you. “Not all anger is destructive. There is healthy anger” I really want to make a change in this way. I want to be more honest. And I want to have more faith. Faith that heart-centered motivation is there at the forefront. And faith that this relationship can sustain the changes that are required for it to evolve. Would it be okay, if I started, in this relationship, being more honest about the things that hurt? Or the things that anger me? Knowing that it’s really because I want to find a new normal that will serve us both ?’ You might as well give it a go, you’ve tried evrything else. Could avoid an ‘Iatrogenic’ – therapist-induced – divorce.27:T2063,Integration After a fortnight in the jungle, your relationships might never be the same Soheila Sokhanvari, The Gift, from the exhibition Rebel Rebel at The Barbican , London till 22 Feb 2023 “I’ve a feeling we’re inadvertently harming a lot of family members. If your partner goes for a two week ayahuasca retreat in the jungle, your life is going to change.” Thus warned Dr Adele Lafrance in her lecture to Vital students about how feedback from the frontlines is informing psychedelic therapy. And the emotion-focussed therapy expert told the Vital cohort that things can get even more cluster-fucked than that, once psychedelic rhetoric sets in. “The concept of blame in psychedelic work is very delicate and potentially dangerous,” she says in her quietly subversive style, “there’s that fundamental belief that ‘we are all one’ and ‘inner conflict is related to outer conflict’.” Transcendent resolutions usually only happen in retreat brochures. “Healing can be disruptive,” points out the self-declared ‘ steward for reality ’ – “We don’t want to throw anyone under the bus.” If handled correctly, “Holding the healing for the patient’s chosen, natural environment can encourage positive effects, lessen negatives, and evolve relationships,” says Dr Lafrance, improving key connections for the benefit of all concerned. “Neuroscience supports the healing power of supportive caregiver-loved one reactions,” she continues, encouraging “Working at letting go of blame narratives and fantasy as a tool, in particular those involving our primary caregivers… as for some reason, at this stage of evolution, humans are strongly affected by the context of attachment relationships.” Psychedelic culture, its rhetoric at least, is infamous for butting up against reality: from free love to not doing any washing up in the hippy commune and the ‘all conflict is bad, mmm-kay?’ notion referred to by Dr Lafrance above. “It’s a skill to hold space for absent family members” And patient-voyagers often come crashing back down to Earth when they head back to the all-too-real environment of the office, family dinner table, or marriage bed. “As a field we need to think how we’re managing systemic stress,” says the working doctor, “If we foster asymmetry of growth by only treating one person, it can have worse outcomes for the client – breakdown of a marriage, for example. There is a high chance of getting divorced, when if we treated both the relationship could have thrived.” MDMA-assisted couples’ therapy is still a few years off. What can psychedelic therapists do to keep ‘systems’ like couples and families in union till then? “It’s a skill to hold space for absent family members. And it can be an especially complex skill to deeply validate the client’s experience while still honouring the family member,” advises Dr Lafrance. “We don’t want to throw anyone under the bus” She’s a specialist in Emotion Focussed Therapy (EFT) which has its own branch for next of kin, Emotion Focussed Family Therapy (EFFT). During Zoom lectures, “I normally have my hibiscus behind me,” says the congenial clinical psychologist, with no further explanation of her favourite flora’s current whereabouts, “I normally point at it while I say this; a client’s lineage makes up the whole plant. So, an example of what I might say [about their family] is, ‘Yes, they were not able – not didn’t care, or didn’t try. Let’s cultivate these experiences, so you can be the first flower in your family lineage to bloom.” Cod spirituality around ‘respecting the ancestors’ is best kept in mind, rather than hectored at the client. “We don’t have to tell the patient, but it’s important for us to remember the cultural, religious and social influences that changed the directory of their lives.” Here in the UK, family members have a legal right to a ‘needs assessment’ that can provide additional support, and a study on Multiple disassociation disorder (MDD) Dr Lafrance is consulting for here in Europe involves the family. “This could be a formal process during screening [in the USA] as things get legal, especially if they are under-resourced or unaware,” she says. Those of us who are wary of social services padding about our home, or feel their help may be superfluous, might also find ourselves cast in a role of responsibility, where certain emotions are unwelcome. And personally, I’ve seen more women presenting at services usually associated with men, like anger management (see the Kardashian sisters for a celeb example). It’s connected to a sense of overwhelment, usually from satisfying others’ needs before one’s own. “We don’t want people to taint our experience when it’s so fresh, raw and vulnerable. So we tell the family that they can’t expect to hear all about it” Says Dr Lafrance, “There are gender differences, unfortunately, that are still true you know, in terms of how we have been culturally conditioned to connect with emotions. Men still struggle more with sadness, fear and shame. Women, because of cultural conditioning, and socio-political movements meant to suppress female assertion, still struggle with healthy anger. So that’s why I use this dichotomy: ‘Which one is true for you?’ Because it’s not always gender specific, especially as we continue to evolve as a culture around questions related to gender roles.” The respected clinical psychologist also recommends discretion around any potent visions and insights voyagers may’ve enjoyed. “At the end of the session we’ll ask the client what they feel comfortable sharing that doesn’t compromise them, their needs, or their integrity, but is still informed by what a couple might need. We don’t want other people to taint an experience when it’s so fresh, raw and vulnerable. So we tell the family that they can’t expect to hear all about it.” Bear in mind that sharing you spoke to an omnipotent mushroom counts for that. What if, like myself, you sometimes get carried away with the notion that everyone in your family would benefit from a little medicine work? “When I was in the jungle what came up over and over again was – you have to be in touch with reality” In the post-lecture question and answer session, I asked Dr Lafrance how not to share too much with friends and family: “Yeah, in fact, that would be another point of direct intervention, actually. So thank you for bringing that up,” she replied, “If someone in the context of the ceremony, you know, or session says, like, ‘Oh my gosh, I wish my parents would do this, I wish my brother would do that, I wish my sister…’ then I will ask them to look more deeply into that.” Doing so might enable the patient to “Release themselves, and release that person from, you know, having to be at the same stage of healing,” says Dr Lafrance, “Release self first, release other second. And if that comes up in integration sessions, I would do it the same way – like, ‘Yeah, check in with the part of you that is longing for that. Let’s see what it needs. Let’s see what it says’.” Dr Lafrance can certainly tell you what the Grandmother Spirit had to say about her own familial ins-and-outs, during a lengthy ayauasca retreat. “When I was in the jungle, that was one of the things that came up over and over again – like, you have to be in touch with reality.” Which is probably a better tip than ‘You must respect the ancestors.’ But like anything genuinely helpful, it’s not easy to take on board. “They are limited in their capacities,” she explains, “And it’s not because they don’t love you. It’s not because they desperately want you to be different, that you’re not going to be able to get what you’re looking for. And so where else you’re gonna get it? Inside . And I cried many tears over that, you know, sprawled out on the earth outside of the maloca. Like, not wanting that to be true.” Ceremony in Jamaica with Sacred Transitions Retreats and New Psychonaut Treasure Beach ‘The Cornwall of Jamaica’ is where I’d send anyone close to me pondering a first experience. Take a look.28:Teac,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph of the Week A model of ‘psychedelic instrumentalisation’ by early humans, and of the evolutionary consequences of its intergenerational recurrence… Figure 1: ’A model of psychedelics instrumentalisation by early humans, and of the evolutionary consequences of its intergenerational recurrence. The left side represents the process of instrumentalisation, which can occur repeatedly across the life-span of a generation of hominins. The right side represents the process of niche-construction supporting gene-culture coevolution across generations as populations construct and bequeath transformed ecological and social environments that exercise selective influences on following generations (Odling-Smee et al., 2003). The left side of the diagram portrays potential selective advantages conferred by psychedelic use under the socio-ecological conditions in which our ancestors evolved. The right side illustrates the process of selective feedback through which psychedelic instrumentalisation could have enhanced the creation and evolution of the human socio-cognitive niche. The four coloured boxes on the left represent the major aspects of the emerging human adaptive complex that created the socio-cognitive niche; these involve skills and processes potentially amplified by psychedelic instrumentalisation, with the two-directional arrows between the boxes representing the interconnectedness of these competence realms that coevolved in creating our unique adaptation mode. The emergence and persistence of this adaptive complex across human evolution permitted the progressive construction of socially modified environments (represented by the green box at the right side of the diagram) that in turn selected for enhancements in the same underlying human propensities and capabilities (represented by arrows with a plus [+] sign) that sustained the socio-cognitive niche.’ From: Psychedelics, Sociality, and Human Evolution by José Manuel Rodríguez Arce and Michael James Winkelman, published in Frontiers of Psychology, September 2021. My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. It’s supposed to be strictly second hand snap-ups only. But I’m flagging on that to be honest. It’s now more in the spirit of a second hand bookstore. This week: The Entropy of Bones by Ayize Jama-Everett You’ll probably have to get it from/in America or off of Amazon Ayize Jama-Everett handled the psychedelic racial awareness training on Vital. There’s a bit of a syncronicity here because I came across his name before in relation to my martial arts side hustle Battles of London (‘The brand making fight clothing cool’ says Men’s Health ). I was going to hassle him for a short story for our print mag. But, y’know, lockdown. Reading the signs, I bought this one because it had a snake on it. The cover’s actually by John Jennings , a top-flight comic artist (and more) who Jama-Everett’s created a graphic novel with. Actually, one of the things I admire about The Entropy of Bones is that Jama-Everett must get told all the time ‘Why isn’t it a graphic novel?’ and that he’s nonethless written two others in the same vein (series, in fact). Anyway, what’s really good about The Entropy of Bones is it’s about getting into your body. Which is admittedly also in danger of bnecoming psycedelic rhetoric, one of the unofficial themes of this Unofficial Vital Student Zine . Plus there’s lots of other five star biz too, like: super-powered martial arts, smokeable psychedelic fungi, international-level decadence, weed farming and jungle drum ‘n’ bass. Related reading Kool-Aid Corner #1 Kool-Aid Corner29:T1f37,My unofficial Vital Study Zine # 16 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space Pamela Simard , ‘BDL’ Dr Charles Nichols – son of canonical chemist Dr David Nichols – puts forward a single very good reason for extracting the profound components from psychedelics. “These drugs are taking so long to develop because the FDA wants much more rigorous testing,” he informs us from the front line of medical authorisation. One particular medicine on his to-do list Charles found by isolating the properties of mescaline, synthesised from the peyote cactus. Turns out psychedelics interact with cells in the soft muscle tissue around the heart , as well as the brain. He’s already registered a patent . While LSD for example “isn’t a very strong anti-inflammatory” Charles says, mescaline has an “extremely potent” effect on inflammatory-based issues like, for example, breathing condition asthma . The discovery could have major implications for psychedelic healing of previously unconsidered issues. Not just physical struggles like asthma but also schizophrenia, Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s which are all connected with inflammation . “So much has to do with inflammation and the over-active immune system right now,” says Charles, pharmacology professor at LSU Health Sciences in New Orleans with a background at Purdue and Vanderbilt universities. Charles on the job . Embroidered lab coats FTW ‘Inflammation’ is shorthand here for ‘chronic inflammation’. Oxidants produced in the aftermath of a stress hormone spike for example, linger around and screw stuff up over time. “I never intended to follow my father into psychedelics actually” It’s a cause of cancer, psoriasis, arthritis, asthma, allergies, Chron’s Disease, hepatitis, neurodegenerative diseases like Parkinson’s, and more. In younger folks chronic inflammation is mostly caused by stress, bad diets and poor sleep. The chemical aspect in question has nothing to do with the ‘psychedelic’ properties of mescaline. It has the same anti-asthmatic effect on its own sans tripping when tested on Charles’ elite lab rats bred for psychometric testing. The intrepid rodents tested it out against 25 other designer psychedelics from the drug cupboard Charles inherited from his father David: the pharmacologist who synthesised DMT for Rick Strassman , MDMA for MAPS and psilocybin for PsiloDep 2 . “I never intended to follow my father into psychedelics actually,” says Charles coyly when I ask in the Q&A if he’d ever noticed the hand of fate guiding his work – like it did when Albert Hoffman felt compelled to re-examine the LSD that’d sat on his shelf un-investigated for seven years. Charles tried to evade his cosmic destiny in vain. Two separate freaky coincidences nudged him towards a career in consciousness expansion. The eventual pharmacologist initially studied genetics. Even now Charles’ ‘animal models’, creatures bred for testing purposes, are much envied in scientific circles. Exhausted by the minutiae of fruit fly genetics after finishing a Phd, the younger Charles was restless for change. Twirling absent-mindedly on his lab stool wondering how to enter the world of employment, Charles spied a promo ad for a new book from Vanderbilt University scientist Elaine Sanders-Bush, who he’d heard his father mention. He called up and asked about assistant roles. “It turned out the job involved studying the effects of LSD on mouse and rat brains,” says Charles, “it was one of only a handful of labs doing so at the time. They’d run out of budget for now and couldn’t hire anyone. But a few months later Elaine called and asked if I was interested.” Charles met Sanders and showed her his resumé featuring his education at Perdue University. “Elaine said she knew a Dr David Nichols there, at which point I had to tell her,” confesses Charles. “Eventually we might isolate the qualities of peak experience, ego dissolution and breaking stuck thinking” The next turning point came as Charles was working at New Orleans University in the chaotic aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. Struggling to find researchers he took a chance on a visiting Chinese scientist who needed facilities. By 2013 Charles and collaborator Bangning Yu had isolated the effects of mescaline-derived DOI on inhibiting tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-a mediated inflammation , which is associated with asthma, Parkinson’s Disease and many more conditions not previously part of psychedelic research. ‘Our data suggests,’ reads the modest blurb, ‘that sub-behavioural levels of certain psychedelics represents a new, steroid-sparing, small molecule strategy for the treatment of peripheral inflammatory related diseases.’ Targeting diseases on the fringe of psychedelic potential is not where Charles’ quietly vast ambition ends, though. The basic neuro-scientific explanation of how psychedelics do their thing is the chemicals interact with receptors in the body’s cells. In particular ones given the code ‘5-HT2a’ usually given over to the neurotransmitter serotonin. LSD contains serotonin in its chemical make-up. It latches on to receptors; hence the lengthy trip. Serotonin certainly isn’t simply ‘the happiness chemical’. It’s related to memory, learning, imagination, sexual arousal, appetite, anxiety and ‘diseases with complex etiologies.’ “Pressing different 5-HT2a receptors, and others, creates the various effects,” says Charles. Identifying medical properties could be just the beginning, he insists: “Eventually we might isolate the qualities of peak experience, ego dissolution and breaking stuck thinking.” That’s not all. A new testing system Charles has designed examines the long terms effects of a single dose, identifying ‘persistent normalisation of stress-induced hippocampal dysfunction relevant to depression and other psychiatric conditions’ Find out more about Charles’ astonishing findings and their implications in this issue’s contents just below. You can also see Charles present his findings here , talk about inflammation and more with Mind and Matter here , and his thoughts on psychedelics and genetics plus more over on the New Psychonaut YouTube lecture channel . Follow Charles on Twitter at @lab_nichols . If you want to go deep on neuroscience may I recommend Tokyo-based, Cambridge-educated neuroscientist Dr Andrew Gallimore’s extensive guide . Here’s what’s in this week’s issue of your multi-syllabic Vital Student Zine, themed along Vital Psychedelic Training’s core pillars of study: Featured Appliance of Science Purists sneer at scientific tinkering. But lab studies showed Dr Nichols how psychedelics heal the body. Could he uncover the secret of profundity too? Neuroplastic Smiles “Biology drives the effects of psychedelics but therapy shapes them,” says the latest scion in the Nichols psycho-pharmacological dynasty. Brain architecture and morality Keep those hearts open to differing emotions triggered by corporate psychedelia. And watch our for N-BOMes. Wicked Wheeze A chemical component of mescaline can treat asthma, perhaps many more physical problems. And it’s not even the bit that makes you trip. Transcendental family systems Ready for ceremonies with you, mum and dad, the grandparents plus your kids and even the dog? Kool-Aid Corner #16 Your regular round-up of trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life. These five items I pulled from the week’s research are themed along Vital’s natural element-themed structure. Air provides an overview of psychedelic use, Fire concerns therapeutic applications, Water covers ‘space holding’ – the art of keeping it together, Earth is where you’ll find medical matters, and E t h e r discusses integration, the process of bringing psychedelic power into regular life . Click straight through to your pet subject.2a:T1553,Approach Purists sneer at scientific tinkering. But lab studies showed Dr Nichols how psychedelics heal the body. Could he uncover the secret of profundity too? By Ryoichi Kurokawa Neuroscience is different to other aspects of psychedelic study, ‘since it is so spectacularly and usefully right over so many things.’ Raymond Tallis wrote those semi-satirical words in Aping Mankind: Neuromania, Darwinitis and the Misrepresentation of Humanity . Neuroscience ‘is often given authority where it has none’ warns Tallis. Grudgingly I admit all those long words and graphs might come across well in a formal context. During a presentation to drug legislators, for example. Certainly compared to showing a clip of Tales from the Trip on the the meeting room’s wall-mounted LCD screen. So it’s sweetly satisfying for heads to beat bureaucrats at their own game with the slew of pro-psychedelic neuroscience stats flooding out of respected institutions. Granted, the arcane apparatus of the psychedelic experience itself remains beyond even the grasp of they who have mastered the most multisyllabic words from this incomprehensible, in-style, inculcation. “That’s still a wide open mystery,” confesses Dr Charles Nichols , eminent psychedelic pharmacologist and Vital neuroscience lecturer. “Specific pathways may be involved in the psychedelic process” Charles is the son of Dr David Nichols , chemist to the stars. David made the DMT for Rick Strassman , MDMA for MAPS and psilocybin for Johns Hopkins . “Back in the 2000s my father’s lab looked at the cross talk downstream from when G-alpha-i protein interacts with a specific beta and gamma that activates a hormone called Src, which then activates a series of enzymes. That’s the very top effector.” Right. No wonder nobody’s got to the bottom of it as yet. “Specific pathways may be involved,” Charles whispers conspiratorially to the cheap seats. No talk of neuroscience in these pages is complete without a mention of Greatest Living Englishman Dr Robin Carhart-Harris. Dr Carhart-Harris’ sympathetic yet rigorous research at scientific bastion Imperial College London brought the psychedelic experience its medical legitimacy. His REBUS , ‘relaxed beliefs under psychedelics’ model is widely considered the neatest summation of psychedelic neuroscience. (without wishing to damn it with faint praise). “My lab studies what psychedelics do that serotonin doesn’t” For anyone too embarrassed to ask the scientific way to say ‘tripping’ is ‘Relax the precision of high-level priors or beliefs, thereby liberating bottom-up information flow, particularly via intrinsic sources such as the limbic system.’ Obviously. Dr Charles Nichols is a pharmacologist developing new drugs. Unlike his celebrated psychedelic chemist dad Dr David, Charles has the benefit of Carhart-Harris’ research, or its slipstream at least. Charles uses his prodigious skill with the pestle, mortar and petri dish to identify, isolate and augment certain properties within his arsenal of exotic designer psychedelics. Specifically, “The study is my lab now is around what psychedelics do that serotonin itself doesn’t,” says Charles. Which is a lot. He’s already found that mescaline-derived DOI has a tremendously positive effect on inflammatory conditions including asthma. And, he’s worked out that it’s not even one of the bits that makes you trip . Which has implications aplenty for widespread use. And the sensitive conversation around non-psychedelic psychedelics. ( Ethnobotanist Richard Evans Schultes wrote in 1938 , “Some of the ills listed as responding to peyote were tuberculosis, pneumonia, scarlet fever, intestinal ills, diabetes, rheumatic pains, colds, grippe, fevers and venereal diseases.” Cheers Mark Gunther of Lucid News ). Psychedelics possess less ‘inhibitory’ effects on brain receptors that might suppress ‘excitatory’ ones, compared to serotonin. They hit the accelerator while cutting the brakes: boosting neurotransmission while hindering the body’s autonomous attempts to bring body chemistry back to ‘normal’. “The profound and mystical effect itself is still a mystery” This initiates a ‘synaptic cascade’ of excitatory messages. Once that gets to the Raphe nuclei in the brain stem connected to the whole brain, it’s blast off. The resulting “downstream cross talk” takes an unusual route through the nervous system. Precisely what is a little vague. Zen meditation buff Dr Bryan Roth is on it with a system he calls ‘ TRUPATH , an open-source biosensor platform for interrogating the GPCR transducerome’. He’s also the guy making the non-psychedelic psychedelics for DARPA . “All psychedelics have a surprisingly different set of reactions with the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptors associated with serotonin,” says Charles, “but they all work on 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2a.” Neuroscientists gave it with the catchy nickname ‘5-HT2a’. Relax, they’ve got loads more. Mescaline for example only activates two other receptors besides 5-HT2a. LSD’s “complex pharmacology” on the other hand means it interacts with 17 different receptors in total. ‘The phrase 5-HT2a agonist has supplanted psychedelic , which still carries faint whiffs of hippie-era hedonism,’ tech bible Wired tipped us off in its recent feature The High-Stakes Race to Engineer New Psychedelic Drugs .2b:Tbb7,Therapy “Biology drives the effects of psychedelics but therapy shapes them,” says the latest scion in the Nichols psycho-pharmacological dynasty Ron English, ‘Rabbit Grin’ The freshly ‘neuroplastic’ brain and new grey matter created during ‘neurogenesis’ both require careful curation from therapy afterwards, declares Dr Charles Nichols. It’s notable that a hardcore neuroscientist stresses the importance of combining his drugs with talk therapy. “If you don’t have therapy in the weeks after you may go back to that baseline state,” says the star chemist , “the process strengthens newly made connections and dampens old ones.” It’s a clear decision he’s come to after a career formally studying the effects of mind-altering chemicals, under exhaustive laboratory conditions. And taking fatherly advice from dad David, the most prolific psychedelic chemist of his generation. ‘Neuroplastic’ effects last for many days after the psychedelic experience itself. Little spiky nodules sticking out from the surface of brain cells called ‘dendrites’ grow in cells all over the brain. This provides fertile ground for fresher, healthier thinking patterns to germinate and grow. ‘Neurogenesis’ is different. It’s the generation of new brain cells. Those ones your school nurse said you’d never get back. Admittedly establishment science is yet to entirely admit she was be wrong. Humans are only capable of neurogenesis in the hippocampus, boffins reckon. We get it from aerobic exercise, sex, worthwhile achievement and all the other good stuff. No prizes whatsoever for guessing what else is said to cause neurogenesis. Say neurogenesis is real and not some figment of the ever-lively psychedelic imagination. Given it definitely happens in chimps and rats it probably is. These new brain cells require injecting with healthy thought patterns by integration tactics and therapy too. What’s more, Dr Charles Nichols, born of David, categorically states that psilocybin is a more effective anti-depressant treatment than ketamine. “If you don’t have therapy in the weeks after you may go back to that baseline state” Although ketamine boasts impressive effects including its distinct ‘glutamate surge’ and anti-microbial properties, Charles’ rats felt psilocybin’s anti-depressant powers for much longer. Real psychedelics use their own neuropathic pathway to create neuroplasticity, believes Charles, not the MTOR pathway usually associated with glutamate-derived GABA and any ketamine-led ‘surge’ thereof. Charles’ lab rats are still above their baseline satisfaction scores three months into the official testing period and counting. On ketamine they were back to baseline after one week. “Both will snap back but the difference is significant,” comments Charles. Related reading Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill W’s LSD use inspired 12-Step and cured his depression Psychedelic therapy is an art first and a science second2c:T1631,Space Keep those hearts open to differing emotions triggered by corporate psychedelia. And watch our for N-BOMes By Daniel Amersham DARPA, the Defence Advanced Research Project Agency AKA the US military, have funded UNC’s Dr Bryan Roth to the tune of $26 million for development of a non-psychedelic anti-depressant . This jars with many in the space who prefer their medicines to not only come from plants but look like them too . The ketamine crew were jumping skyclad through bonfires at sunrise when they found out a fungus generated it (to kill worms) earlier this year. I don’t entirely blame them. Breaking up nature’s gifts feels hubristic. ‘Pharmahuasca’ contains only the big guns, DMT and MAO-inhibitors, of ayahuasca the jungle brew, which contains as many as 28 different ingredients in total. “Is this bullshit thing started by this random company going to replace psilocybin for example? I don’t think so,” Empath Ventures founder Brom Rector told Psychedelics Today recently, “In business you need to make a big improvement, otherwise no one really cares.” The anecdote that rings true with me the most in this argument is ‘In hospital they could give you morphine that doesn’t make you high, but the proper stuff works best.’ THC in marijuana is thought to increase the efficacy of CBD, while the latter makes the former safer. Pioneering psychedelic scientists like Vital neuroscience lecturer Dr Charles Nichols ’ dad David, Albert Hoffman who discovered LSD, and Alexander ‘Sasha’ Shulgin reviver of MDMA are lionised in the space. Indeed Charles follows in the footsteps of his father Dr David Nichols : who coined the term ‘entactogen’ for MDMA, first synthesised pharmaceutical DMT for The Strass’ 1990s experiments. He also made the MDMA for MAPS and psilocybin for Johns Hopkins. Dr David Nichols is still working. Considered a leading expert in research into the neurotransmitter dopamine, his recent discoveries are already being trialled on Parkinson’s disease and schizophrenia. Charles inherited a library of over 100 new chemicals from his father upon beginning his own research. “It takes a lot longer to work with these drugs mostly due to the extra level of testing the FDA requires” Compass Pathways, not satisfied with supposedly trying to patent psilocybin, have developed 150 new psychedelics with the assistance of committed scientist Professor Jason Wallach. Wired ran a gushing profile of Wallach, who fits its brand image of the passionate inventor in its summer 2022 feature ‘ The Race to Develop new Psychedelic Drugs ‘. Wired journalist John Semley got less copy from Pathways CEO George Goldsmith and cofounder Lars Wilde: “Ask them what they had for breakfast and they’ll tell you how excited they are to build a new future for mental health,” wrote the frustrated hack. Modern-day chemists and their backers get a far harder rap than the old guard, let alone more colourful contemporaries like billionaire Tyringham Initiative sponsor Anton Bilton, and Tokyo-based neuroscientist Andrew Gallimore whose book Reality Switch Technologies: Psychedelics as Tools for the Discovery and Exploration of New Worlds , on how to learn from DMT hyperspace visits lands very soon. Humanity’s developed a love-hate relationship with pharmacology. Sometimes we can’t get enough of its magic beans; later we become deeply suspicious of what it’s up to in its windowless labs. That’s not just a projection of our own shame. Several high-profile incidents over the decades have stoked the embers of misgiving. It was the Thalidomide scandal , where a generation of noticeably deformed children resulted from a less than rigorous safety testing program, that put the kibosh on early LSD research. The chemical generation’s complex relationship with drug use, and a preference for talk therapy amongst… talk therapists that veers into militancy haven’t helped. The pharma sector’s also deeply partial to bureaucracy in its many forms, and that rarely goes down well with those seeking caring and compassion. Anecdotally, there’s also the feeling that the corporadelic guys, with their lanyards and anodyne PR-speak are not really one of us . Corpos drew groans at London’s Psych Symposium when a panel on decriminalisation was told we can’t be trusted to grow and eat our own magic mushrooms, because we can’t rate the dosage accurately enough. Besides, where are all these revolutionary new psychedelic-derived medicines? “It takes a lot longer to work with these drugs mostly due to the extra level of testing the FDA requires,” says Dr Nichols during his Vital lecture that opens the course’s Medical Overview of Psychedelics and Clinical Evaluation core module. But it’s that level of investigation and learning that often yields major discoveries. In scientific circles LSD is noted for the knowledge about serotonin studying it led to. Frankly why should everyone with asthma have to take a trip? Not everybody likes metaphysical poetry, ambient music, plus discovering the inner secrets of the universe… maybe the effing Death Door . Besides space explorers are already enjoying the fruits of next-generation psychedelic research. And citizen scientists in the front line of consciousness exploration make for finer subjects than lab rats. Designer drugs combining psychedelic and empathogen (entactogen) effects are not your regular liberty cap and MDMA punch though. ’N-bombs’ or NBOMes to give them their scientific name are described as ‘ultra potent’ by the journal Frontiers in Neuroscience . There’s a niche for the ambitious space holder.2d:T1058,Medical A chemical component of mescaline can treat asthma, perhaps many more physical problems. And it’s not even the bit that makes you trip Keith Coventry, ‘Inhaler’ in the permanent collection at the Southbank Dr Charles Nichols’ major research breakthrough is the isolation of anti-inflammatory properties from the active agent in peyote. Mescaline, in 1917 the first psychedelic ever synthesised, could treat conditions ranging from asthma to psoriasis and complex neurodegenerative disorders. Dr Nichols’ lab has isolated anti-inflammatory properties within a designer drug variant of mescaline called DOI . Mescaline enjoyed significantly better results than steroidal treatments when tested on Charles’ premium lab rats . And mice . It’s almost certainly down to 5-HT2a receptors in the soft muscle around the heart becoming activated by psychedelics too . Charles’ experiments showed mescaline/DOI prompted ‘extremely potent inhibition of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α-mediated inflammation.’ I hope you’re sitting down to take in what happens after that, ‘cos it might be a bit much to get your head around straight away: ‘5-HT2A receptor stimulation with the agonist (R)-1-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)-2-aminopropane [(R)-DOI] rapidly inhibits a variety of TNF-α-mediated proinflammatory markers,’ says the report barely managing to contain its enthusiasm. That’s not all. ‘Including intracellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), vascular adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1), and interleukin (IL)-6 gene expression, nitric-oxide synthase activity, and nuclear translocation of nuclear factor κB, with IC50 values of only 10 to 20 pM.’ Unbelievable. Importantly, these anti-inflammatory aspects of mescaline/DOI are chemically separate to its psychedelic properties. Any medicines derived from them wouldn’t prompt a psychedelic experience. This isn’t just good news for any asthma sufferers who don’t fancy turning themselves on each time they need a blast of their inhaler.  “We analysed 25 different psychedelics and revealed no correlation between behavioural potency and their ability to cure asthma” It’s also a boon for folks who could do with help for their conditions as soon as possible.  “One reason for isolating non-psychoactive components is the Federal Drug Association,” says Charles, “Even a minute psychoactive component requires much more rigorous testing.” New medicines derived from psychedelics that don’t blow the patient’s mind, make it to market much faster. “Pretty much every everything nowadays seems to involve some aspect of of inflammation,” comments Charles, “the neuro-immune network hypothesis has become a really hot field. It underlies a lot of psychiatric disorders,” he says, citing depression, schizophrenia plus Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases.  This doesn’t mean that someone on the wrong end of Alzheimer’s should be obliged to trip balls. Or kids with asthma. “Inflammatory cells exist in the lungs, that affect asthma, and all over the body,” says Charles, “the brain has a primitive immune system too. Biopsies have revealed inflammation in the brains of a subset of depressed patients: cytokines and microglia are increased. Unmedicated schizophrenics have a significant amount of neuro-inflammation, plus it’s associated with drug abuse.” “LSD is actually a poor anti-inflammatory and DMT has none of the properties at all,” says Charles when I ask him about his asthma breakthrough. It only came about when he was left without a researcher after Hurricane Katrina, and took a chance on visiting professor Bangning Yu who needed a lab and complimented his own research. “We analysed 25 different psychedelics and revealed no correlation between behavioural potency and their ability to cure asthma,” says Charles, “We will be able to engineer drugs that have less psychedelic activity, potentially even no psychedelic activity, but full anti-inflammatory properties.”  He’s already honed a version of lab psychedelic DOI that has two-thirds less of the mind-expanding effects, but offers the same relief from asthmatic wheezing.2e:Td01,Integration Ready for ceremonies with mum and dad, the grandparents plus your kids and even the dog? Shanthi Chandrase, ‘Neural Introspection’ Tribal gatherings could be on the cards for all the clan. Phase one tests showed microdoses of LSD did no statistical harm to Alzheimer’s sufferers. “LSD’s complex pharmacology works on so many different 5-HT receptors,” 17 to be exact, “that it impairs several of the various functions that lead to Alzheimer’s Disease,” says Vital neuroscience lecturer Dr Charles Nichols . Testing LSD on Alzheimer’s patients is an adaptation described as “surreal” in the post-lecture discussion by a psychiatrist studying on Vital. Corresponding tests in the UK are taking place around Liskeard in an idyllic corner of Cornwall, England. Phase one tests for safety have indicated no harm using microdoses of up to 20ug. There was however a noticeable increase in ‘psychotic episodes’ amongst the placebo group. Suppress your giggles triggered by thoughts of oldies on an LSD placebo turning up at the health centre convinced they’ve seen a pink elephant. “Psychedelic protocols with children will happen” Sounds like the elders can join in the ancestor ceremony; as befits them. So can the younger generation. “Absolutely there’s a place for effective and safe psychedelic therapy in younger people,” said Dr Ben Sessa in the Q&A after his Vital lecture back in the Therapy module. “I have seen too many teenagers lose the battle to mental disorder and kill themselves in my career,” continued Dr Sessa in fine style, “I have no doubt that psychedelic protocols with children will happen.” It’s on already in fact. “MAPS are currently leading the pack in terms of MDMA for PTSD, are going to be doing PTSD research in initially teenagers 14 to 17 then younger age group 11-14, and then possibly six to six to 11,” says Dr Sessa. And mum? She can feel really special down at the ceremony. “Hormone replacement therapy significantly increases 5-HT2A expression” Charles’ is admired for his ‘animal models’. Not a collection of balsa wood dinosaurs that adorn his lab windowsill; rats bred to be especially sensitive to psychometric testing. This sensitive rat pack is mostly female, which has led Charles’ team to discern a key detail for menopausal psychedelic voyagers. “Oestrogen, and hormone replacement therapy significantly increase 5-HT2a expression,” he reveals, “So we have to optimise women and men differently.” To test for depression whether treated with psilocybin, ketamine or SSRIs, rats are usually challenged to swim across a small basin of water towards an exit duct. Paddling around searching around for the way out is known as ‘active coping’ and therefore healthy. Zoning out in the middle of the water awaiting your watery end ‘cos what’s the point anyway? is ‘passive coping’, and bad news of course. Plus with dogs and cats taking Prozac and other SSRIs it can’t be long before your favourite furry fellow sentient beings are in a higher state of consciousness too. Fun for all the family. Ceremony in Jamaica with Sacred Transitions Retreats and New Psychonaut Treasure Beach ‘The Cornwall of Jamaica’ is where I’d send anyone close to me pondering a first experience. Take a look.2f:T872,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Thumbnail image by Janjo Surace Graph of the Week What ‘pharmahuasca’ including DMT does to genes in rats. Positive effects were shown in the balance between reactive oxygen species cells and the anti-oxidants that keep them from becoming too ‘cytotoxic’ (damaging to other cells) and implicated in the pathogenesis of EG cancer, asthma, pulmonary hypertension, and retinopathy Supplemental Figure 1: Heat plot for pairwise comparisons between control, predator exposure/ psychosocial stress (PE/PSS), and PE/PSS + treatment groups. The heatmap illustrates hierarchical clustering of the scaled counts (z-scores) for a set of biologically relevant differentially expressed genes (FDR&lt;0.1). From: Pharmahuasca and DMT Rescue ROS Production and Differentially Expressed Genes Observed after Predator and Psychosocial Stress: Relevance to Human PTSD by D Parker Kelley, Katy Venable, Aspasia Destouni, Gerald Billac, Philip Ebenezer, Krisztian Stadler, Charles Nichols, Steven Barker, Joseph Francis. Published in ACS Chemical Neuroscience Jan 2022 My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: The Science of Microdosing Psychedelics by Torsten Passie Originally £19.99 now fetching £35-plus Everything you need to know and considerably more from former Harvard lecturer Dr Passie. This is considered the definitive book on microdosing, the unexpected but rather popular trend for small regular doses of psychedelics. Originally published by Psychedelic Press for superb UK public conference for the heads, Breaking Convention, this will cost you upwards of £35 on the second-hand market now. Dr Passie includes previously untranslated international studies in his comprehensive round-up. He also tackles talking points like the placebo effect. Even if microdosing does not produce any significant effects and it is all placebo, the trend is a new way to introduce it into our society, he told a corresponding interview on the Psychedelics Today podcast. Related reading Kool-Aid Corner #1 Kool-Aid Corner30:T1bc6,My unofficial Vital Study Zine # 15 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space Pablo Amargino, ‘Spiritual Heart Operation’ via Dr Luna’s True Amaringos gallery Dr Luna is the eminent expert on indigenous psychedelic use worldwide. He’s every bit the classy, cosmopolitan professor; armed an incorrigible streak required to pioneer psychedelic research. The Guggenheim Fellow and member of the learned Linnean Society of London breaks up a thrilling, theatrical presentation with itemised lists of how Western psychedelic therapy can incorporate Amerindian tradition to considerable benefit. And Amazonian animism, Dr Ludo says, is a practical lifestyle for interacting with the natural world. “In mythical times animals, plants, and humans were all shamans able to transform,” says Dr Luis Eduardo Luna during his Vital lecture, “this is why we believe that selfhood does not apply exclusively to ourselves, but to any entity that communicates through signs.” Plants do communicate he points out, maybe in a more sophisticated way than us. Thus Spoke the Plant author Monica Gagliano has proven they generate delicate harmonies: “Maybe you can hear it, just being in the forest, without ideas,” urges Dr Ludo. “You can feel your child. You do not need words.” Myself and Dr Luis Eduardo Luna at Philosophy of Psychedelics But he didn’t get there purely by publishing papers. Or with soundbites like “The Anthropocene began in 1610, when carbon dioxide started rising because of all the forest growing over the farms of a massacred civilisation. Europe is just a peninsula of Asia.” Instead, Dr Luna self-actualised through “direct experience” – manifesting, learning and transforming within our physical reality. “Is ayahuasca addictive? No! I have taken it a thousand times” Born 1947 in Florencia, Colombia a city noted for its proximity to rainforest and tribal settlements, Lois Eduardo Luna was sent away to religious school to study philosophy as a boy with the hope of becoming a priest. He hot-footed to university in Madrid, Spain where he graduated in philosophy and literature. Returning home aged 21 he fell in with a Canadian traveller called Terrence McKenna (the very same). The two took yagé , a variant of ayahuasca prevalent in Colombia together for the first time. “Her own body is a metaphor. She is a river, a serpent, an umbilical cord” In 1980 Dr Luna met a Colombian vegetalista ‘plant teacher’ Emilio Gomes. The shaman told him, “Everything has spirit. Everything is intelligent,” and eventually took Luna in as an apprentice. The Journal of Ethnopharmacology published Dr Luna’s fieldwork paper The Healing Practices of a Peruvian Shaman in July 1984. The abstract (introduction) reads, ‘The basic ideas of his cosmovision are presented… attention is given to the concept of “doctor” or “plant teacher” applied to certain plants which are supposed to “teach medicine”, if the appropriate conditions of isolation and diet are observed… During the period of isolation the spirits of these plants teach the initiate certain melodies or “icaros” that he will later use when practising his shamanistic activities.’ The accompanying film Don Emilio and his Little Doctors is “probably the first ayahuasca documentary,” he says proudly but with signature charm. His first book Vegetalismo was published in 1986 and Luna was made an associate of the Botanical Museum of Harvard University. “There is more healing in connection, outside in the forest among the trees” Not soon after Luna came across a distinctive Peruvian artist named Pablo Amaringo , who painted beguiling scenes of plant medicine ceremonies and their accompanying visions. The pair took ayahuasca art to the world, with Luna arranging global exhibitions and persuading the Finnish government to open an art school where 300-plus mestizos, mixed heritage, children received tuition. Luna still acts as agent for authentic trade of Amaringo’s works . During the late 1980s the action switched to northern Europe, where Luna studied for a Phd in Helsinki and Stockholm, then took up a post lecturing at The Swedish School of Economics in Finland. Synchronicity abounded when he discovered a predecessor in the same role was theological firebrand Rafael Karsten , who wrote one of the first ever detailed accounts of Amazonian plant medicine ceremonies in 1935’s The Head Hunters of the Western Amazoas . Now Professor Luna, and a globe-trotting ayahuasca ambassador with several books under his belt , he was invited to visit Rustler’s Valley in South Africa, an Earthrise Trust alternative community. Also visiting, coincidentally, was permaculture pioneer Bill Mollison who informed him how miniature organic ecosystems can be created. Luna also met Dale Millard, an adventurous anthropologist who introduced Dr Luna to nearby African tribespeople who told him they too had plant teachers of their own. Dozens, in fact. “Everything has spirit. Everything is intelligent” Inspired yet again, Dr Ludo struggled through the woes of doing business to build Wasiwaska Research Centre . It’s a breathtaking psychedelic nature reserve and ceremonial paradise, on a tip of the agreeable archipelago of Florianópolis , Brazil. Most of your favourite international space heads are hanging out there: maybe tapping some of the many ayahuasca vines for some sap syrup, taking a perambulo around the exotic selection of rare psychoactive plants with far-out flowers, having some reflective time in the library with a cup of kava-kava , or simply watching the marmoset monkeys get high. “Therapy is narcissistic, ‘me’, going inside,” says Dr Luna, “There is more healing in connection, outside in the forest, among the trees. Depression is caused by not connecting.” Check out Wasiwaska in Dr Luna’s presentation of its gardens at Exeter University where he’s a research fellow, his autobiographical and philosophical keynote speech Decolonising the Self at Exeter’s 2022 Philosophy of Psychedelics conference, and much more on the New Psychonaut YouTube lecture channel . Here’s what’s in this week’s issue of your directly experienced Vital Student Zine: Featured Medical Anthropology and Psychedelics with Dr Luis Eduardo Luna Dr Luna took yagé for the first time with Terrence McKenna, discovered ayahuasca artist Pablo Amaringo and founded Wasiwaska psychedelic nature reserve. Vegetable rights and peace “If psychedelic therapy embraces animism it can do wonderful things” says star anthropologist Dr Luis Eduardo Luna. The Hybrid Model Dr Luis Eduardo Luna’s got a plan to mix shamanic ceremony with Western medicine. Vibing as one Research claims voyagers prefer guides to trip too… in the shamanic tradition. Soul reduction Sacramental plants and fungi are intended to be ingested entirely and not carved into compounds. Botanic therapy Wasiwaska is Dr Luis Eduardo Luna’s psychedelic nature reserve. Gardening just got even more quietly inspirational.31:T2a54,Approach “If psychedelic therapy embraces animism it can do wonderful things” says star anthropologist Dr Luis Eduardo Luna Pablo Amargino, ‘Vision of the Snakes’ via Dr Luna’s True Amaringos gallery Mention an interest in animism and most folk’ll think you’re holding a seance. It’s become a fancy term for the kind of ‘spiritualism’ where a Madame Xanadu type supposedly relays messages from beyond the grave… with wildly varying degrees of authenticity. Trivia buffs might extend their apocryphal knowledge to animism being an early religion where pretty much everything – the sea, your spear, that sabre tooth tiger over there – had a spirit essence dwelling within it. They probably got it from anthropologist Sir Edward Tylor who wrote in 1866, ‘the theory which endows the phenomenon of nature with personal life might perhaps conveniently be called animism’ in an article with a title that’d come back to haunt him… Religion of the Savages . “Animism is not a religion, or a philosophy” Tylor did actually challenge convention at the time by pointing out that the tribes were no less intelligent per se : but their civilisation, such as it was, hopelessly backward. You may be unsurprised to learn that most the above displays a grasp of animism that is loose at best. “I’m not idolising Amerinidian cultures; there was human sacrifice ,” said Dr Luna in the question and answer session after his keynote at this year’s Philosophy of Psychedelics conference , “huge festivities alongside people waiting to be burned.” But swotting up on animism seems sensible, considering it’s the guiding ethos of the people who’ve been using psychedelic medicine for at least 4000 years longer than we have . If western psychonauts can get to grips with animism, despite our “impoverished worldview” as Dr Luna puts it, the advantages to psychedelic therapy will be significant, he claims. And we may be able to arrest the climate crisis. Plus even halt the dreaded Anthropocene . “Animism is not a religion, or a philosophy” says Dr Luis Eduardo Luna, who was born in the Amazon and first drank shamanic yagé with Terrence McKenna in 1971. Dr Luna’s lecture climaxing Vital’s therapy-focussed training module was packed with guidance for modern-day western practitioners the anthropologist brewed up from the historic psychedelic rituals of South America and beyond. “Once you re-connect with the world, you know are never alone” The religion of many Amazonian tribes is… actually a syncretic christianity, and they combine animistic principles with catholic worship in their ceremonies. The translated lyric sheets of Maria Sabina’s LP contain artfully improvised prayer mixed up with references to her local ecosystem. Syncretic combinations of animism and christianity have been recorded since 1930 and are thriving today. Animism is instead a practical path for successful interaction with your environment, “Entirely based on experience,” that urges a “non-conceptual relationship with the natural world. Once you re-connect with the world, you know are never alone,” whispers the man who brought Pablo Amaringo and ayahuasca art to the West. Before you think this is all sounding a bit vague and maybe there’s a Zoom lecture coming up about it that you can check out, “it’s not based on a book, or a doctrine,” cautions the anthropology expert. Vital lecturer Ashleigh Murphy-Beiner , who worked as a guide on Imperial College’s landmark PsiloDep 2 trials, has studied the effect of traditional ayahuasca use on mindfulness and cognitive flexibility . While presenting the results to the MIND Foundation in 2019 Ashleigh used meditation as an example of a skill that is better learned by practice – direct experience – than via spoken explanation. Animistic tribes prize directly acquired knowledge so highly that they don’t have schools. Formal education nonetheless has existed for millennia. The tribespeople never stop learning, and they do have teachers. These are plants (and fungi). Guess which ones? A 4000 year-old fossilised San Pedro cactus , for example, was found in a dig near Lima, Peru. Ayahuasca the concoction is only around 250-300 years old, but its cousin Caapi much older. You know exactly what those plants and fungi have to say about ‘reconnecting to the world’ don’t you? Plus how good they are at giving you advice (most of the time, after careful reflection)? Remember too that veteran psychedelic therapists stress the pretty much total importance of first hand experience , not only of the medicine itself but the guide process in particular . More on that over in this week’s Space Holding section. Connecting to nature, community and self is apparently key to psychedelic therapy’s success. Luna says a ‘non-conceptual relationship to nature’ is intrinsic to animism too. The ‘lived experience’ of our relationship with the natural world is starkly apparent in the environmental crisis, no matter how many ‘theoretical’ arguments that it doesn’t exist there are. Me weeping over the David Attenborough film with the turtle wrapped in plastic bags while carrying on smearing the same carbon footprint is a ‘conceptual’ relationship with nature, not a real one. Recently, some of us in the West who fancy ourselves as adventurous have been re-learning the importance of a (non-conceptual) relationship with nature with the help of the same plant and fungi teachers that have been used in the Amazon for 4000-plus years. In the past we’ve found a load of other useful stuff we found lying around the place. Like cotton, rubber or the majority of medicines we use and food that we eat. Which the inhabitants told us about after we beat the shit out of them. “If you feel lonely go outside. Look at the grass growing between the paving stones in your street” Hence the weary attitude heading from that direction. “Europe was simply a peninsula of Asia in 1492 when Columbus landed. Power in the region was centred on the Middle East,” mulls Dr Luna mischievously in his presentation to Vital students. He even rolls his eyes at western understanding that man is ‘disconnected’ from nature. In fact, according to Luna the situation’s far worse. “We are narcissists,” he says, “my gut is teeming with bacteria – of course I am connected. But we look only within ourselves. If we were to have silence: no radio, advertisements, vehicles… the answers will come.” Luna’s animistic life hack for the western condition? “If you feel lonely, go outside, look at the grass growing between the paving stones in your street.” Doesn’t appeal much to your dopamine receptors? Unsurprisingly so perhaps, because as Luna explains “the most essential lesson is re-enchantment with the world,” an appreciation of the moment, also a favourite subject of our plans and fungi teachers. Less enamoured are, as Dr Luna puts it, “The people with the habit, the black one or the white one, it is difficult for them.” Sounds like it might be tough for anyone to get their heads around let alone psychic gatekeepers like the the clergy and clinicians. “Selfhood does not apply exclusively to humans. How arrogant an assumption” Help explain please Andy Letcher, high-level druid and author of Shroom a definitive history and analysis of psilocybin-based fungi. “It’s about building a relationship with place,” Letcher told Graham Hancock’s son Luke on a podcast for funky Japanese set-up the Kakuichi Institute , “really listening to the world around you in the wider sense. Get close to any plant, meditate next to a tree, and you will feel it.” Animism urges respect for the natural world, to the extent that man is a humble part of it alongside not only “the river and the jaguar,” but also “the bee people and the ant people,” as Dr Luna calls our six-legged friends during a keynote presentation about his Wasiwaska psychedelic nature reserve at Exeter University’s 2022 Philosophy of Psychedelics conference. Indeed the beaches of nearby Cornwall, Dr Luna points out, are ‘animistic’ and would be ascribed a ‘spirit’ too, one that represents the combined effect of sea, wind, tide, pebbles, crabs, grasses… and humans. Importantly, “Selfhood does not apply exclusively to humans, how arrogant an assumption,” advises Dr Luna. Instead according to animism we’re part of an ‘ecology of selves’ symbiotic to the environment. It works both ways. “Any sentience is worthy of respect,” says Dr Luna and mankind has certainly done well out of stuff he’s found lying around over the centuries. In the Amazon especially, as it happens. The better we do by it the better it’ll do by us. In general, that is. One of the lessons of life’s direct experience is that some thing are simply bigger than us, and this can develop self-compassion to soothe more challenging emotions like loss. “Animism is entirely based on experience” Being a dickhead to another human on the beach in Cornwall would probably cause a ruckus, right? Applying animism to the beach scenario, being a dickhead to anything – anyone – up to and including the pebble people (maybe beyond) causes a degree of disharmony. And from disharmony, not singing in time, comes disenchantment, a lack of meaning, purpose, and belonging. Through lived experience we learn, sometimes bitterly, that we’re not the only things that might cause disharmony, or spread it. It teaches us ways to hone our own vibration, to just the right pitch. Usually. Because we are not as important as we think we are… another pet subject of the plant and fungi faculty. We don’t like to accept that we aren’t, though. And we’ve dreamed up ways to avoid any lived experiences that might remind us we’re not. I initially made a long ranty list of these to publish here, but let us all instead ponder our own myths of avoidance and denial. For inspiration, Luna quotes Davi Kopenawa , a shaman from the Yanomami region where gold mining has caused mercury levels in unborn babies to rise by nine times. “His is a sort-of ‘reverse anthropology’,” says Luna: ‘White people call us ignorant because we are other people than they are. But their thought is short and obscure. It does not succeed in spreading and rising because they prefer to ignore death. They constantly drink cachaca and beer, that overheats their chests and fills them with fumes. This is why their words become so bad and muddled. We do not want to hear them anymore. They do not dream as far as we do. They sleep a lot, but only dream of themselves. Their thoughts remain blocked in their slumber, like tapirs or tortoises. This is why they are unable to understand our words.’32:T1c4f,Therapy Dr Luis Eduardo Luna’s got a plan to mix shamanic ceremony with Western medicine Lucile Haut , ‘Cyberwitches’ What can the Western model take – sorry, learn – from a tradition of psychedelic medicine that’s many millennia on from our own? After all our boffins recently confirmed that the mystic elements of a psychedelic experience can be especially restorative, although that aspect of healthcare was dismissed as ‘miracle work’ centuries ago. Despite their shared basis of a healing process using psychoactive plants, what we understand as psychedelic therapy is still very different to a traditional shamanic ceremony. That doesn’t stop regular guys like Green Bay Packers quarterback Aaron Rogers crediting ayahuasca for the two seasons in a row he just won the American football team’s ‘most valuable player’ award, and telling sports reporters ‘The greatest gift I can give my teammates, in my opinion, is to be able to show up and to be someone who can model unconditional love to them’ in the pages of USA Today . Those unable to travel can give virtual reality shamanic ayahuasca a try. Dr Luis Eduardo Luna is considered one of the foremost experts in the Amazonian shamanic custom. In his Vital lecture closing the course’s therapy-themed module, he rattled off a bluet-point list of what western therapy can do to make it as effective as its Amerindian inspiration. And as popular – given the choice it’s difficult to opt for a K-clinic treatment room on the high street over Dr Luna’s Wasiwaska retreat. Even halfway houses like luxury ayahuasca resort Rythmia or the growing number of on-trend local circles offer much more of that all-important mystical allure. “I think the doctors would be happy, as they participate in this separation, this depression” Dr Luna believes that group therapy over a period of days with eight to ten participants: “Intensive collective retreats are potentially more efficient and less expensive than individual treatments at medical institutions,” says Dr Luna demonstrating that he’s meeting the Western mindset halfway. Moreover, in a group session over several days a patient’s “Sense of community is created too” says Dr Luna. He also suggests the presence of a medical doctor, “Nearby in case help is needed, but not as part of the ceremonial aspect.” From then on Dr Luna’s tips on how western psychedelic therapists can learn from the ancient ways diverge from our current model. His number one tip is for the therapist to trip too, like a traditional shaman does. “The therapist will go part of the route of taking the medicine him or herself, ready to give assistance if needed,” he says, “Only persons thoroughly familiar with modify the state of consciousness can understand and therefore assist persons on the going the experiences. Besides the therapist’s theoretical knowledge, he or she needs to have first hand experience in training with at least one or several sacred plants, fungi or other substances.” Which may put the puma amongst the guinea pigs, so to speak. “Ideally a well-trained indigenous practitioner, or [facilitators] trained within indigenous communities would be present too.” You can read more about the controversial trend of ‘co-sitting’ over in this issue’s Space Holding section. “Illnesses of civilisation are often related to a state of separation from the natural world” Dr Luna also frowns on western use of isolated chemicals instead of the whole plant or fungus they’re derived from and we’ll go further into that in this issue’s Medical section. He’s also got some superb suggestions for your retreat centre’s design based on his experiences tending the exquisite gardens at his Wasiwaska Rereat Centre in Florencia, Brazil that I detail in this week’s In teg rat ion slot. Here’s Dr Luna’s other suggestions specifically relevant to therapy. Echoing the styles of pioneering MDMA therapists Dr Ben Sessa and The Mithoefers, Dr Luna urges level communication between therapist and patient where possible. “There are no shared myths,” he says, “despite a complex socio-economic provenance.” The codified language used instead is psychology, “which the patient has little knowledge of” and is very unlikely to lead the conversation in. Read Dr Ben Sessa’s own tips for negotiating the transcendental with alcoholics at his Awakn clinic in Bristol in Vital Student Zine issue #14. Preparation for both therapists and patients should take the form of traditional dieta , “Minimising the use of salt, sugar or fat and consumption of alcohol. The food should be produced on site as much as possible so participants have direct access to the plants.” Also verboten, or kept to essential use only, is the use of personal electronic devices and social media. “Pharmacology does not take into account social or ecological concerns” Furthermore Western healers could benefit their own knowledge and reciprocate by establishing “Transnational networks involving conservation in educational ecological projects, involving whenever possible traditional societies, cross cultural recognition and integration of knowledge derived from indigenous sources.” Instead of chugging beer at the bar and doom scrolling during downtime on retreat, patients can enjoy face to face interaction, educational lectures and plentiful nature worship, “spending time in silence with the forest or gardens encircling the body, feeling the presence of the nonhuman persons.” Dr Luna expands: “Illnesses of civilisation are often related to a state of separation from the natural world. We would be learning about the habitat, disease tuition, cultivation, preparation, and cultural uses of sacred plants and fungi by traditional societies.” Our pharmacological model “Does not take into account social or ecological concerns,” he adds, instead putting emphasis on legal, economic, bureaucratic and moral factors, presented for the benefit of the patient when they are only really in place to protect and feed the managerial machine. Shamanic healing views discomfort very differently, considering it part of a restitution cycle. Affliction is something we consider anathema to medical treatment, and life outside hospital too. But it is the body exhuming disease that causes the unpleasant symptoms of illness, not the malaise itself. The close monitoring western psychedelic therapy adheres to may consider ‘disturbing’ outbursts – somatic, verbal, or ‘humorous’ in either the amusing or purgatorial sense – to be unacceptable in a treatment situation. Clinical staff and patients without the knowledge of their importance may not feel able to embrace the process, and may even consider encouragement of it to be inappropriate and even abusive. A combined model of Western and Amerindian spiritual healing seems like a dream for now. Albeit a very worthwhile one that’s being mirrored to an extent in ‘underground’ ceremonies. Dr Luna though is optimistic for his vision being taken on board by the medical establishment: “I think the doctors would be more happy, as they participate in this separation, this depression.”33:T153e,Space Research claims voyagers prefer guides to trip with them in the shamanic tradition Pablo Amargino, ‘‘The Sublimity of the Suminura’ via Dr Luna’s True Amaringos gallery Down at your local psychedelic clinic, your therapist is certainly not tripping with you like an Amazon shaman would. ‘Therapists should not take any mind-altering substances before or during therapy sessions,’ says a 2021 review of the nascent Western sector. While it’s certainly not new for indegenous people to voyage alongside each other, historically the ceremony leader alone takes the medicine while the community receives mystical healing. In Dr Luis Eduardo Luna’s question and answer session following his Vital lecture on medical anthropology, one student who facilitates jungle ayahuasca ceremonies lamented this state of affairs in the West. “You drink when you assist,” she said, “There is no choice. And so much magic happens.” Sober sitter or co-consumer? published May 2022 in Addiction Research and Theory concluded that heads out in the space did prefer their guide to be tripping too. Although maybe not as hard as they were. How much? One poster is quoted as recommending “around a quarter to one gramme of cubies [Cubensis mushrooms, the underground’s fungi of choice].” Why? The ‘benefits of improved communication and shared experience’ according to the report. “The relationship is subject-to-subject, not object-to-object” It went on, ’Psychedelic co-consumption was portrayed as an opportunity for bonding, connection and communication between co-consumers. This seemed related to a perceived mutual understanding of the ineffable that couldn’t be accessed without the influence of psychedelics.’ Given that a strong, open, trusting relationship between voyager and therapist is absolutely key according to modern-day experts wouldn’t a quarter gramme of Cubensis for the therapist contribute to the success of the therapy? That’s not all. Normals hanging around bring the vibe right down. ‘Consuming psychedelics alongside sober people could increase anxiety,’ suggest researchers, ‘It was also suggested that sober carers could make psychedelic experiences more awkward. Other forum participants simply found being around sober people whilst experiencing the effects of psychedelics to be irritating.’ The Sober Sitter or Co-consumer? paper said recreational requirements for guides did align with many other elements of psychedelic therapy: including not directing the experience, first hand knowledge of the substance, unconditional acceptance of what comes up for the patient, and boundary-setting beforehand. The data also uncovered recommendations that a ‘sober sitter’ be used during difficult emotional times, when out and about… or taking 5-MEO DMT. “Lived psychedelic experience represents knowing through identification, and transformation… the spirit of the jaguar” How does the ceremony leader partaking – be they guide, therapist, sitter, shaman or space holder – contribute to a better experience? Dr Luna thinks it’s because “The relationship is subject to subject, not object to object.” Being ‘on the same level’ is equivalent to a “relational epistemology” where there is “reciprocity” which in this case means a mutually endorsed understanding rather than overdue donations to the indigenous people. By tripping together “magic happens” because therapist and patient are ‘being’ together rather than ‘doing therapy’. They share a bathtub of their own cosmic love, as opposed to nervously going through the motions set out in a top-down bureaucratic directive. “That is non-particpation, disenchantment,” says Dr Luna, “with objectivity, the world is not of my own making… I do not feel a sense of belonging to it. What I feel is a sickness of the soul.” Relating instead to a sense of subject promotes agency and mindfulness. Here’s someone who knows about lived experience: ‘I am not a thing, a noun,’ wrote engineering genius Buckminster Fuller , ‘I seem to be a verb, an evolutionary process – an integral function of the universe. Life is regenerative, and conformity meaningless.’ I pinched this contribution from a Vital school chum, in case they are reading. “You drink when you assist at the ceremony, and so much magic happens” Dr Luna says this is part of the ‘lived experience’ of animism. “Ancestral language is 70% verbs compared to 30% in English,” he adds by way of illustration, “the lived psychedelic experience represents knowing through identification, and transformation… the spirit of the jaguar.” Not simply referring to ‘your dried pig skins’ as militant tribesmen call books. Sure, the preference for ‘co-consumer’ guides comes from the psychedelic underground rather than clinical patients. Yet as the report points out in its intro, ‘In a similar way that indigenous knowledge about psychedelics can be utilised to inform psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy,’ like the lecture from Dr Luna you’re reading about now, ‘we believe that Western people who use psychedelics outside of a clinical environment for healing purposes also have knowledge relevant to psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy.’ Like Dr David Luke said in his Vital lecture on transpersonal psychology, the underground can teach the medical sector “everything.”34:T1d78,Medical ‘Pharmahuasca’ pills are simply not the same as ingesting traditional brews fully in a ceremonial context By OMA at Foundazione Prada , Milan. Yes, these are Fly Agarics. The Vine of the Soul has been synthesised. Kind of. Pharmacusca is a combination of DMT and beta-carboline stomach inhibitor harmine, which also boasts psychedelic properties. “There’s a huge body of evidence showing ayahuasca’s therapeutic potential,” says Imperial College’s Ashleigh Murphy-Beiner who’s been a cheerleader for ayahuasca research here in the UK . What’s used for most tests on ayahuasca, ‘The Vine of the Soul’ is ‘pharmahuasca’ a combination of DMT and harmaline, the brew’s two stand-out alkaloids, often taken as separate pills 10-20 minutes apart so the mono-inhibitors in harmine that stop the stomach from registering the fact there’s a bucket of DMT in there can take effect. Pharmahuasca’s long been gaining popularity with recreational users too. “The vines are part of a magnificent cluster of beings” “You just use the alkaloids and you say this is equivalent,” comments Dr Luis Eduardo Luna in his lecture closing Vital’s therapy-themed teaching module examining what Western practitioners can learn from traditional amazonian approaches, “It isn’t, neither chemically or synergistically. It is reduced down to a pill… an object.” Pharmahuasca also dispenses with the aspects of ritual, myth and ceremony – and even the digestive pruging – that are obligatory in traditional use. 2021 resarch paper Examining changes in personality following shamanic ceremonial use of ayahuasca gently insisted, ‘Ceremonial practices may be informative about key elements of psychedelic-assisted experience that potentiate positive psychological changes’ and used authentic ceremony as its laboratory setting. Traditional ayahuasca brews contain more than two dozen active ingredients , some of which are contained in the chunky bits floating around the ichorous concoction. “The vines run throughout the forest. They are in symbiotic relationships with other plants, insects, animals and microbes, part of a magnificent cluster of beings,” says Dr Luna who cultivates an ecosystem friendly to Columbian ayahuasca equivalent yagé at his Wasiwaska nature reserve in Florentina, Brazil that you can read more about in this issue’s Integration item. Preparations and admixtures for ayahuasca, yagé and another concoction capi differ between tribes and locations, so don’t accept any black-and-white categorisations from know it alls while debating psychedelics at one of your global north dinner parties. For example the Colombian Orinoco tribe consider ayahuasca to contain a ‘male’ spirit while it is generally thought of as ‘Mother Ayahuasca’ elsewhere and in the West. “I believe in both approaches, science and animism. We could be epistemological polyglots” The Colombian yagé Dr Luna first took alongside Terrence McKenna in 1971 uses the chaliponga plant as its DMT source instead of chacruna. While it may not be of relevance to Western researchers the preparation and ceremonial aspects of yagé are certainly different. Yagé’s effect is considered more contemplative and ayahuasca’s purgative, but that statement is also generalising to an inappropriate degree. Forcing down all the ingredients ceremonially for the true effect is no piety, insists Dr Luna. Indeed traditionally ayahuasca and yagé are used to solve practical issues (for instance locating a missing cockerel, clearing out your guts) rather than ‘finding God’ as canonical maestro Maria Sabina put it. If Westerners can come to terms with an overlap of the spiritual and the material inherent in amazonian animistic and plant medicine culture, “We could truly be epistemological polyglots – studying the living and non-living world with the precision of scientific language, while simultaneously somehow perceiving the spirit, the anima of all that exists,” said Dr Luna in his keynote speech at Exeter University Philosophy of Psychedelics conference earlier this year, titled ‘Decolonising the Self’. “I believe in both approaches, science and animism, and that they are entirely compatible in the modern world,” he edicts. Even the paper Examining changes in personality following shamanic ceremonial use of ayahuasca printed in March 2021’s Scientific Reports slipped into the academic conversation that ‘The present study shows preliminary support for the therapeutic benefit of the shaman, icaro, purgative elements, cognitive reappraisal, sacramental atmosphere, and communal/group context.’ 44% of Amazon biomass is vine. Vines are plants that require other surfaces to support themselves. They climb up these, which are mostly ‘self-supporting’ trees, using strong arterial veins pumped with water so they love rainforest. While vines might creep around and not stand up straight without leaning on something else, they’re of considerable importance to the local ecosystem and tribespeople put them to good use as a versatile building and manufacturing material. Animals use them as transport, for avoiding predators in particular. Their abandoned biomass keeps the soil below host plants nutrient rich and vines provide food and medicinal sources aplenty: grapes, cucumbers, melons, and vanilla come from vines. Dr Luna lists the importance of ingesting the whole plant/fungus, not an extraction, in his bullet-points for Western therapists. Ideally it would be grown on-site at one’s paradisiacal retreat like Dr Luna’s Wasiwaska, a psychedelic nature reserve. Ecological projects involving the local community bring economic benefits. in the Amazon itself for example, retreats investing in the community would bring serious good vibes back in return. I’d cite Jake’s in Jamaica as a great example, would-be psychedelic travel entrepreneurs. Ayahuasca’s shown considerable benefits to mindfulness (being ‘in the moment’) and cognitive flexibility (common sense) in tests for depression plus it’s also been a focus for studies into borderline personality and eating disorders. Leading crowdfunded research into trauma already testing DMT on rats is none other than… the esteemed Dr Robin ‘Hollywood’ Carhart-Harris, now ‘Founding Director of The Neuroscape Psychedelics Division and newly endowed Ralph Metzner Distinguished Professor of Neurology and Psychiatry at the University of California San Francisco’ (capitals all theirs). Hollywood says, ”DMT is a particularly intriguing psychedelic. The visual vividness and depth of immersion produced by high doses of the substance seems to be on a scale above what is reported with more widely studied psychedelics such as psilocybin or ‘magic mushrooms’.” Before you think ‘Isn’t that a bit of a Western science-y interpretation?’ that’s what Hollywood does – get these concepts over the line with the scientific establishment. We should thank him for that, I reckon. Even if he is using pharmauasca. For now – because the active chemical ingredients may only play one part in the healing power of Amazonian-style plant medicine traditions. And not be so powerrful without the… is magic too strong a word? ingredients that are impossible to replicate in laboratories and treatment rooms. Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment35:Te2f,Integration Wasiwaska in Brazil is Dr Luna’s psychedelic nature reserve Hummingbird babies nesting on Dr Luis Eduardo Luna’s Wasiwaska nature reserve Gardening just got even more quietly inspirational. Among Dr Luis Eduardo Luna’s itemised tips for for the Western psychedelic therapy sector presented in his Vital lecture is: ‘Experience the medicines among beautiful, dedicated surroundings.’ Another recommendation is to grow the plants and fungi locally, plus grant patients access, “So they can spend time in the forest feeling the presence of non-human persons. There is healing from contact with the forest itself.” Specimens should be kept around at least, so “People have direct perception of them.” Wasiwaska is Dr Luna’s psychedelic nature reserve, retreat and research centre on a far corner of Santa Caterina island, Brazil’s answer to Ibiza. Artist Alex Gray, Cosmic Serpent author Jeremy Narby, writers Graham Hancock and Sue Blackmore, plus DMT pioneer Dr Rick ‘The Strass’ Strassman are among the luminaries on Wasiwaska’s advisory board . Dr Luna, who was born on Santa Caterina is not the only local ecologist; an initiative to reintroduce oysters to the ecosystem has proved stunningly successful. This El Jardin de la Ciencia (scientific garden) was founded in 1996 while Dr Luna was teaching at nearby San Catarina University. It boasts extensive ethnobotanical gardens, a psychedelic library, and study facilities plus guest rooms. It is the culmination of several other attempts that Dr Luna didn’t let phase him. Distinctive brugmansia aurea flowers at Wasiwaska Dr Luna showcased the garden in a speech titled The Wasiwaska Ethnobotanical Garden in Southern Brazil: A Chronicle at Exeter University (where he is an associate research fellow) for its Transdisciplinary Research Colloquium on Psychedelics in July. The enclave is home to miles of ayahuasca vines, fifty-plus chacruna plants, capi, yagé, plus even more exotic DMT-containing plants like the distinctive brugmansia aurea , which flowers near constantly and produces “an intoxicating scent, that at night is overpowering. Its leaves vary in length like a key. A spider living inside the flowers changes colour accordingly; the bees are interacting with the spiders, getting some sort of effect. Perhaps it’s possible to make psychotropic honey.” Ayahuasca flowers at Wasiwaska Dr Luna and Anna tap sap from the psychoactive vines and drink it as a syrup. DMT-containing Cohaba trees, which Christopher Columbus turned down and took tobacco home instead, are also in situ . Non-native plants like Polynesian kava-kava, Tabernaemontana catharinensis a South American plant with similar effects to iboga, and peyote – which has been grafted on to San Pedro so it grows much quicker – have been cautiously introduced. Permaculture innovations like clitora plants, which sport vibrant flowers and invigorate clay soil, support the ecosystem. Living alongside are the hummingbirds, bees and spiders one would expect in the wild. The garden is mostly curated by Dr Luna’s wife Anna, who recently introduced marmoset monkeys. These headed straight for the Cohoba trees that were part of their ecosystem, taking resin in morning and evening. The monkeys climbed other DMT-rich plants that weren’t part of their natural environment and did the same. “My first teacher, Don Emilio,” about whom Dr Luna made probably the first ayahuasca documentary Don Emilio and his Little Doctors in 1984, “told me everything is full of life, of spirit,” he reminds us. See what’s on at Wasiwaska via wasiwaska.org36:T4d1,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life From ‘The Creatures with the Creator’ a tribute to Glauco Vilas Boas by Adrix Graph of the Week Group MDMA and LSD therapy trails are underway. Put the mix CDs in the middle with the leaflets Group MDMA and LSD therapy outline from MAPS trials recently underway My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: The AA Atlas of Secret Britain Easily available from WoB Developing a personal relationship with your indegenous cosmology? Looking to trip out the glovebox in that new state of the art camper van? Then bail out the barley sugars and give thanks to the Spirit of Sediment for this round-Britain guide to the wyrd and sort-of cute but macabre at the same time. Divided into regional sections for easy referral. Disclaimer: even indegenous British sacred groves may have purgative properties. One New Psychonaut reporter walked around Avebury stone circles and took five lengthy visits to the bathroom upon returning to his nearby bed and breakfast. Scrumpy rituals meanwhile are being colonised . Next issue: Vital’s Space Holding module is all about the direct experience…37:T198d,My unofficial Vital Study Zine # 14 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space Jimmy Cauty, ‘Riot Shield’ Dr Ben Sessa’s book The Psychedelic Renaissance acted as exactly that. The agenda for a new Albion is effectively a ‘ hypersigil’ – the gnostic term for a creative work that somehow manifests its content. These effects even included the buzz phrase the proceeding new era of research was awarded. Debuting a decade ago, The Psychedelic Renaissance contained ideas Sessa first officially voiced in a presentation to the Royal College of Psychiatrists in 2006. LSD hadn’t been mentioned in its halls for over 30 years. Since The Psychedelic Renaissance took psychiatry by storm Dr Sessa has hardly been flouncing around in a kaftan. He’s living the experience, conducting frontline child trauma and addiction treatment… including acting as lead psychiatrist on the Bristol Imperial MDMA for Alcoholism (BIMA) project , where patients relapsing into heavy drinking were cut to a rate of 21% from the 73% who do so despite trying medications, 12-step and conventional therapy. BIMA research took place at leading clinic Awakn , co-founded by Sessa in Bristol, UK. It’s now listed on the NEO Toronto stock exchange and has hooked up with David Nutt’s Drug Science. The Mithoefers are on Awakn’s advisory board. Celia Morgan is head of ketamine assisted therapy, an area where Awakn just received 66% of new funding from the UK government and licensed its staggeringly successful ‘Project Kestrel’ design to US chain Revitalist. “I resent the assumption this is all about money. My job is getting the maximum amount of psychedelics to as many people as possible” Sessa is an avid member of the psychedelic ‘subculture’ too. In 2015 he co-founded and ran the Breaking Convention conference that showcases the space’s sharpest upcoming minds. His children are named Huxley, Jimi and Kitty. I’ve noticed during academic presentations that after their personal intro is over it’s de rigueur for presenters to, if they’d like, admit to any horrendous biases. Prostrate before you, I make clear: Dr Sessa is my age, lives and cheerleads for my home town, and confesses to an achingly middle class upbringing that includes winter sports and bedroom DJing… so there’s ‘similarity bias’ there. Moreover: only in the past few weeks I discovered he wrote a column for a hipster magazine I was founding editor of that’s having a bit of a moment now, and made a cameo in a Channel Four sketch show I wrote on. Myself and Dr Ben Sessa (right) at Breaking Convention 2022 So don’t ask me to justify statements like ‘Sessa is our generation’s admittedly unlikely Leary or McKenna’, and yes, I am calling that with this blog post. Instead ask Vital students, whose reactions to Dr Sessa ranged from “That was my favourite presentation so far” to “You’re the most interesting person to hear from in psychedelics right now” and “This has me so excited and hopeful for the future of this space!” Whilst actually being the closest thing we do have to Timothy Leary or Terrence McKenna – closest rival Robin Carhart-Harris has recently zhuzh’d up his look just to keep up – Sessa has succeeded in ushering in a revolution where the two counterculture icons failed. “This is the psychedelic era. Here. Now. We’re living in it,” he decrees to Vital’s class of ‘22. “Following medicalisation the psychedelic underground is richer and freer than ever” How has Sessa made this happen? By following his own advice in the closing pages of The Psychedelic Renaissance . ‘An unfortunate but necessary truth is that professionals working in this field must remain as boring and staid as possible,’ he solemnly advised in those very pages, ‘as well as inspirational and enthusiastic – to get the message across. I do not say all of these dull and conservative things because I lack imagination or fail to appreciate the fun, wonder and spirituality of the psychedelic experience. On the contrary, I welcome and embrace it.’ This trademark approach of blowing minds by stealth doesn’t stop him racking up a ton of newspaper credits , where he lays down psychedelic law (and lore) in a fashion also quite dissimilar to his predecessors. In fact, only this year at 2022’s Breaking Convention he decimated criticisms of corporadelia at his £6K per programme Awakn clinics with: “I resent the assumption this is all about money. My job is getting the maximum amount of psychedelics to as many people as possible, and researching that is very costly. There will still be raves, festivals, ceremonies. The psychedelic underground is richer and freer than ever post-medicalisation.” Dr Sessa is a boon to journalists. Here’s a few choice quotes from his week fourteen Vital lecture: “There’s nothing more dangerous than drinking a bottle of vodka a day” “Then they go back on heroin, or other far, far more dangerous substances like alcohol” “Three quarters of a million people in the UK take ecstasy every weekend and our hospital wards are not full of casualties” “I’m not that spiritual a guy, but I’ll talk to patients about kundalini and chakras till the cows come home. They do also want to talk about things like how to get their children out of social services care” Here he is on NBC with MAPS’ The Mithoefers talking about their slot on Netflix’s How to change Your Mind , showing ITV viewers around Awakn , plus watch his TEDX Talk on psychedelics as antibiotics, explain childhood trauma and MDMA therapy and more on the New Psychonaut YouTube lecture archive . Here’s this issue’s contents arranged along Vital Psychedelic Training’s five learning themes: Featured Indistinguishable from magic Psychedelics are the psychic antibiotic. Behind the mask MDMA provides lasting respite for the traumatised, says Dr Ben Sessa. Where are you from and what are you on? Psychedelic therapists can meet anyone half way with a little universal love. Ravers score rare victory over Mondays ‘Peak early and don’t skimp on quality’ is the Awakn formula to avoid MDMA comedowns. Where social services are the new gods Atheists need answers from their insights too. So do jedis. And children in care. Kool-Aid Corner #14 Your regular round-up of trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life. Next issue: Vegetalismo author Dr Luis Eduardo Luna of Wasiwaska Research Centre38:T1385,Approach Dr Ben Sessa’s greatest conversation stopper: psychedelics are a ‘psychic antibiotic’ capable of statistically curing mental diseases Novotak , ‘Daydream Version Six’ “Psychiatry is a pretty desperate and miserable place to work.” Dr Ben Sessa’s been at the frontline of mental health services since 1997, and deserves a rant. “Where are we going wrong? We’ve had modern psychiatry around for 100 years. And we’re not getting the kind of clinical outcomes we want,” he opines, “younger people get given the SSRIs, can’t work the therapy, and kill themselves.” ‘Psychic antibiotic’ is another of Sessa’s bravura catchphrases. Mental health treatment’s in a miserable state of affairs comparable to general medicine in the late 1800s, says Sessa who first presented his vision that psychedelic medicine could be revived to the Royal College of Psychiatrists in 2006. “Doctors were losing the battle to the infectious diseases, leprosy, smallpox, tuberculosis, people dying post-operatively,” he continues, flexing his storytelling skills in a swaggering lecture, “Back then, were very good at our statistical analysis and epidemiology too. We knew that people were dying, but it wasn’t clear what was going on.” Things changed when a joint German-Japanese team discovered a cure for… syphilis in 1908, and Nobel prizes ensued. “Where is our treatment that gets to the heart of disorders?” ‘Antibiotics’ as they were called, ‘cos they killed bacteria, include any micro-biological treatment for bacterial infection, not just other bacteria bred to fight against their microscopic kin. Penicillin, invented by Sir Alexander Fleming in 1928, is derived from a fungus secretion… just saying. Specifically a mould, which are traditionally used for their anti-infection properties. “Where is our antibiotic?” bellows Sessa in the general direction of the gods, “Where is our treatment that gets to the heart of disorders, and actually cures them? We write these voluminous tomes,” he continues, hitting his stride, “The ‘DSM’ and ‘ICD’. We track who gets depression, and anxiety, and eating disorders, and personality disorders, and addictions, and affective disorders,” here it comes, “…but we’re not very good at treating them.” Dr Sessa’s allowed to ham it up like this because he is legit as any clinician, researcher or spokesperson. “The idea that healing patients would be a bad business model is sick” It’s almost like the anthropology reports from the Amazon… where researchers are struck by the animist doctrine that you’re only allowed to talk shit about stuff you’ve actually done… Tell us why our ailments continue to vex us so, oh unlikely shaman returned from the darkest depths of the forest with knowledge? “Because we treat them symptomatically,” answers Dr Sessa, “We provide a whole plethora of daily maintenance drugs that mask the symptoms. Which the pharmaceutical industry queued up to provide us with.” Yet there is hope. Way back in 2012’s breakthrough Psychedelic Renaissance , Sessa’s book which coined the phrase, he was already declaring psychedelic medicine the ‘psychic antibiotic’ that his profession and his patients crave. In his Vital presentation during the course’s second module covering psychedelic therapy styles, Sessa beams with pride after battering his return key to reveal a graph showing MDMA-AT thrashing a combination of the best anti-addiction treatments money can buy, plus 12-step and more, by a 73% to 21% recovery rate. “We’re not going to cure everyone and therefore put ourselves out of business” Sessa’s surging Awakn chain though, is a listed company. Like other private medical providers, doesn’t he have a duty to shareholders to drag treatment plans out too? “The idea that healing patients would be a bad business model is sick,” and he doesn’t mean in the same way he dryly describes my wannabe-hipster home town of Bristol as ‘extremely sick ’ in his introduction, “sustaining poor treatments with poor outcomes in order to maintain a customer base is absurd.” Accident wards don’t keep your leg held up in traction forever. “There’s plenty of work out there for orthopaedic surgeons mending broken legs,” explains Sessa to an enquiring Vital student in the Q&A, “plus there are plenty of people out there who could do with their mental disorders being completely cured. We’re not going to cure everyone and therefore put ourselves out of business.” Like Ben Sessa? And Bristol? So do we. Ravers score rare victory over Mondays ‘Peak early and don’t skimp on quality’ is the Awakn formula to avoid MDMA comedowns. More mushroom tea, vicar? Savvy brits are sussed to self-care and change is happening. But the vulnerable are being left behind. Hymn of the Big Wheel My hometown has a psychedelic amusement park and high street ketamine clinics. How did that happen?39:T219a,Therapy MDMA provides lasting respite for the traumatised Stefanie Schneider, Boy with Silver Mask (Stay) Photograph MDMA’s ideal for therapy because it can “rebrand your sense of self.” Shame and trauma dance a ghostly tango. An ostracised alcoholic is merely the grown-up version of the abused child we clutch our perals over. Or so says child psychiatrist and leading psychedelic researcher Dr Ben Sessa, presenting to Vital students. “Abused children generate tremendous sympathy,” says Sessa alluding to many high-profile court cases in the UK during lockdown and beyond, “but once the same abused child turns to addiction, they’re written off as a filthy smackhead, or an alcoholic.” Reported child abuse cases rose a staggering 1493% at one point during the C-19 lockdowns. Dr Sessa has worked as a child psychiatrist since 1997. But not just with under-16s. He’s taken his knowledge of childhood trauma and applied it across the all-too-adult issues it causes later. “Existing drugs are not treating the base disorder – trauma” Like alcohol use disorder (AUD) for example. “I naturally take a very developmental approach to mental disorder,” he says, “I think that every adult psychiatrist should spend some time as a child and adolescent psychiatrist, because we really do grow up to become our parents. And those things that we learned in those early years – ‘Even my parents can’t love me, I’m useless, I’m a failure, I can’t achieve’ – become a blueprint for the rest of our lives.” Childhood trauma operates on a scale ranging from forced labour and sustained sexual abuse, to simply growing up in a rigid suburban household where neurotic parents act out their frustrations with a shaming communication style featuring ‘too many shoulds’. “I deliberately lump together childhood trauma, post traumatic stress disorder, complex post traumatic stress disorder, and addictions,” explains Sessa, “it’s very difficult to treat these, and there’s no single approach.” The trajectory from trauma to addiction draws on John Bowlby’s attachment theory and research from the past decade or more connecting PTSD to substance abuse . Attachment theory suggests that maladaptive adult behaviour is more likely to be caused by issues between a baby and its mother and other environmental factors including poverty. This contradicts established psychoanalytic narrative, which says it’s all about… the oedipus complex, and other aspects of thanatos , the Freudian ‘drive’ to act according to one’s most selfish, basest urges. Despite being head of The Tavistock Clinic’s child psychology department from the mid-1940s, Bowlby’s ideas were still being rubbished by the establishment in the 1990s. “If you’ve had an insecure attachment to your parents, you develop these neuro-protective narratives: ‘I’m bad, I can’t achieve, I’m unlovable, the world is dangerous’,” explains sessa, “By the time you’ve been thinking like this for ten, twenty, thirty years you truly believe it. This is why mental disorders become chronic, lifelong unremitting problems. Faced with it, the safest and simplest way of dealing with it is to numb yourself, block out the world with sedating dangerous substances like heroin. And far more dangerous ones… like alcohol.” Like in the USA, there’s currently no pharmacological prescription for PTSD available in the UK. Nor alcohol use disorder; in the United States only 4% of AUD sufferers are given a medication. “We have what we call ‘polypharmacy’,” explains Sessa, “If the patient’s depressed, we’ll give them an antidepressant. If they can’t sleep, we’ll give them a hypnotic. If they’re constantly anxious, we’ll give them an anxiolytic. If their mood goes up and down, we’ll give them a mood stabiliser. If they are hyper-vigilant, one of the core features of PTSD, if this spills over into paranoia will give them an anti-psychotic. And of course, you have to keep taking these drugs day-in, day-out as maintenance medications for the rest of your life. None of these different classes of drugs are curing the patient. They’re not treating the base disorder – which is trauma.” Here in the UK psychiatrists (doctors prescribing drugs), clinical psychologists (NHS trained psychoanalysts who have lots to do) and psychotherapists (talk therapists of wildly varying quality, without medical training) have long existed seemingly independently of each other. Personal and financial resources are required to tackle one’s mental health with impact. “Pharmaceutical MDMA is 99.8% pure and very expensive” I’d recommend medication, psychoanalysis and psychotherapy. But as a customer myself I know it doesn’t come cheap. The experience can be arbitrary too. “After 30 years in psychiatry, my opinion is that psychotherapy boils down to a relationship between the patient and the therapist, and an ability for the patient to talk about their pain,” claims Sessa with authority, “that’s fine for around 50% of people with trauma based disorders.” But not nearly for all. “A significant half, they cannot go there to talk about their pain… they will do anything but talk about that night when they were ten years old, and their grandfather came into their bedroom,” says Dr Sessa. Many therapists are understandably not fully prepared to deal with angry, impenetrable PTSD cases with substance use disorders and co-morbidities like ADHD. “Trauma victims drop out of therapy. We have high rates of self harm and suicide, and very high rates of addictions. There’s a 50% treatment resistance in PTSD. After detox, 70 to 90% of addicts are back on the substance again.” Combining psychiatry and psychotherapy sounds like common sense. But it’s practically unheard of. “The therapy alongside the MDMA makes the difference,” says Sessa pointing out that his clinic Awakn doesn’t offer its current ketamine programme without accompanying talk sessions. Awakn conducted its BIMA – Bristol Imperial MDMA for Alcoholism – project under research trial conditions, so while the process mirrored a regular treatment programme with genuine sufferers they didn’t pay and regulations were fiercely adhered to. Pharmaceutical MDMA was used, “it’s 99.8% pure and very expensive,” says Sessa. MDMA’s cocktail of positive therapeutic effects include a melodic duet between the amygdala and frontal cortex, where the amygdala ‘fear response’ shrinks while activity in the advanced brain grows, providing an ‘optimal window of arousal’. MDMA’s empathy-increasing properties, generated by production of the hormone oxytocin, strengthen the bond between therapist and patent. “Elements of transpersonal psychotherapy were used during the drug sessions” The ‘peak experience’ though remains key for softening the calloused neural pathways that dictate repeated cycles of dysfunctional behaviour, like addiction in particular. “You can’t just tell someone ‘stop thinking like that’. Chronic unremitting mental disorder is all about ‘stuckness’. It becomes your version of yourself.” Decades on from the original trauma, “Something otherwise relatively benign happens in the queue at the post office and you have a panic attack,” illustrates Sessa. BIMA’s eight-week course Sessa describes with characteristic honesty as, “‘MDMA assisted psychotherapy for the treatment of alcohol use disorder’, which is perfectly accurate. It’s never been done before; we were making it up as we went along.” For MAPS-trained Sessa and his prodigal collaborator Dr Celia Morgan (named by Business Insider as one of the ‘Women Shaping the Future of Psychedelics’ ) this meant drawing on their wealth of experience carving out the Psychedelic Renaissance over the past 20 years, rather than riffing. “Of course it was more nuanced than that. We had elements of transpersonal psychotherapy we used during the drug sessions; we used a lot taken from the maps manual for PTSD.” All the subjects were daily heavy drinkers who had been through detox. Talk therapy in the ‘non drug’ sessions, a total of 15 around three MDMA ‘trips’ drew from their experience at the forefront of addiction treatment: “We used elements of Acceptance and Commitment Therapy, Motivational Enhancement Therapy, and CBT [Cognitive Behavioural Therapy], which were typical for addiction studies. We are of course writing the manual for this, and will be using it as we move into Phase 2B.”3a:T11d5,Space Therapists can meet anyone half way with a little universal love Weirdcore , ‘Subconscious’ “Is this is this what love feels like?” That’s what a trial subject in Dr Ben Sessa’s BIMA project using MDMA to treat alcohol use disorder said to him during a drug session. What was his answer? “I thought, ‘Well… no, of course this isn’t the noble, lofty form of love – it’s a transient artificial drug induced experience’.” The Bristol, UK-based psychiatrist remembered his MAPS training met his patient halfway though. “I thought to myself, ‘Hang on… she feels safe, warm and empathic. She feels held, contained. She’s in a trusting relationship with me.’ So I replied, ‘You know what? Yes. This is what love feels like,” he beams at Vital students in his triumphant lecture during our therapy-focussed module. The rapport held: “That’s amazing,” replied the recovering alcoholic from behind her Awakn-branded blindfold, “My whole life. I’ve never felt this, I’ve only ever felt scared, I’ve only ever felt frightened and threatened. But now I know what love feels like. And I have a platform on which to build.” ‘Loved up’ is raver slang for the narcotic-induced tenderness and sensitivity MDMA generates by increasing the flow of bonding hormone oxytocin. “Love will be the only religion, a religion of life for the children of the future” That rush contributes to the healing process by giving PTSD sufferers a glance of what may be. “The positively felt mood from MDMA is very important indeed,” says Sessa. Sigmund Freud wrote extensively about libido , ‘the energy, regarded as a quantitative magnitude… of those instincts which have to do with all that may be comprised under the word… love.’ Opposite this positive, manifesting life energy that Freud dubbed eros though was thanatos – the ‘death drive’ towards addiction, aggression and rumination, derived from a desire to return to the simplicity of the womb. ‘The purpose of life is death’ wrote Freud in 1920. His flying monkey Jacques Lacan postulated that all other drives are ‘partial’ to the death drive. Freudians call it simply ‘the drive.’ Freud’s star pupil Wilhelm Reich was pro-science and anti-mystic. He was nonetheless appalled by this one-sided development. “Love will be the only religion, a religion of life for the children of the future,” Reich wrote in his diaries during 1942, “it will transform man in such a way that the questions of passport and race will never arise.” Reich started well by coining the term ‘Sexual Revolution’ in 1948. But besmirched his reputation for rigour with the invention of implausible Orgone Generators, machines of various sizes and capacity to harness ‘orgasmic energy’ comparable to the eastern concept of chi. “Compassion has a natural partner in forgiveness” Beat generation authors JD Salinger, Allen Ginsberg, Jack Kerouac, William Burroughs, Saul Bellow, and Norman Mailer were all devotees. ‘Mailer kept a small collection of orgone accumulators in his barn in Connecticut; they were beautifully finished, and there was a big one that opened like an Easter egg’ writes Recih’s biographer Christopher Turner, ‘He climbed inside and closed the top.’ This all ended rather horribly with Reich dying in prison and his books burned by the authorities. We certainly haven’t heard the last of Reich; for a start celebs like the Kardashians have been catalysing an Orgone Generator revival for years. No, it’s not a trickster prank. You can buy Reich tat on Etsy. The empathic compassion and awareness are part of this thing called love too. Reich’s predecessors in the field of bodywork are more careful to stress those elements in their own therapies. “Compassion has a natural partner in forgiveness,” says polyvagal theory icon Deb Dana , “awareness brings choice, the second element necessary for a regulated nervous system.” Polyvagal theory, endorsed by Dr Sessa, considers not only overactive fight or flight responses but ‘freeze’ too, the stultifying effect occurring when neither fight not freeze is not an option, seen for example in domestic abuse situations. Trauma victims have ‘the handbrake and the accelerator on at the same time’ in polyvagal terms. “With choice it’s possible to be still or move, approach or avoid, connect or protect,” writes Deb Dana. Forthcoming data reports from Awakn’ BIMA tests will examine compassion and empathy’s detailed role in the process.3b:T10f3,Medical The Awakn formula to avoid notorious MDMA comedowns: peak early and don’t skimp on quality Scott Houston , ‘Party Kids at Dawn’ In 40 years there’s been no single serious reaction to MDMA in clinical setting. Doses taken are 125mg and up, about half the size of a respectable ecstasy pill. But “It’s 99.8% pure, and very expensive,” says Dr Sessa of his MDMA stash. Alongside a 9:30am start time, measured hydration, and overnight stays in the chic surrounds of an Awakn clinic, the integrity of the substance is one of the many reasons why Dr Ben Sessa reckons MDMA comedowns don’t exist. Just like your mate, ‘Hardcore Mandy’. Sessa didn’t exactly say ‘Comedowns don’t exist’ in his December 2021 report Debunking the myth of ‘Blue Mondays : No evidence of affect drop after taking clinical MDMA . “Take it during the day” In fact, like he does say in the proceeding war of words on the letters pages of The International Journal of Psychiatry (which is a pretty cool thing to be having anyway) after the article appeared: ‘We were not stating that ‘Blue Mondays’ do not exist in recreational user populations. Quite the contrary, they do. In respect of power: across 26 clinical MDMA sessions, we did not elicit one single report of acute comedowns. All participants reported no negative disturbance to affect at the end of the day after taking MDMA as the drug wore off. No comedowns. This is a highly significant outcome over 26 separate sessions with clinical MDMA.’ The notorious ecstasy ‘comedown’ where ravers feel considerably less clever on the morning commute than they did atop a riser earlier in the weekend, is likely due to sleep deprivation, over-exertion and dehydration. “People often ask, what about comedowns?” Plus combining recreational MDMA with whatever ravers can get their hands on at 7am, Dr Sessa told Vital students. “Every weekend, three quarters of a million doses of ecstasy are taken in the UK, yet our wards and clinics and outpatient departments are not full of ecstasy casualties. That is a data driven,” he explains, “People often ask, ‘What about comedowns? Recreational ecstasy users describe all kinds of flowery terms to describe this: blue Monday, black Tuesday [usually the worst I find], suicide Wednesday. We saw no evidence of this effect drop after taking clinical MDMA.” “Not too quick on ‘Debunking the myth of ‘Blue Mondays’,” responded a team of Dutch psychologists in masterful pidgin english before going all n =17 on everyone and spreading a really heavy vibe over the whole session. ‘For instance, were there multiple raters, and can the authors report inter-rater reliability?’ They wrote to the editor in the August 2022 issue of the IJP, ‘These questions also apply to the “list of representative questions and responses” included in Table 3. What does representative mean in this case, and how was representativeness assessed?’ The urbane Sessa parried, ‘We feel our recent Blue Mondays article contributes positively to the field by providing a clear report of the relative lack of adverse effects seen with clinical MDMA administration in contrast with the widely reported negative anecdotes seen with recreational use… This is especially relevant given the fact that we were studying potentially vulnerable patients with significant mental and physical illness. We appreciate the criticisms about the article’s hard-hitting title, which has certainly resulted in considerable debate.’ Dr Sessa’s valuable advice to recreational users? “Take it during the day,” he told readers of hoary hedonism journal Vice , “I realise that is a bit unrealistic.” The rave scene adapts nonetheless: next-gen London nightclub Printworks is built in a former newspaper printing press for total soundproofing within a central north London location. DJs play all afternoon and evening to three generations of ravers, mostly on the younger end. Closing time on the Tube hasn’t been the same since it opened in 2017. While Printworks will be demolished to make way for… commercial offices, a successor has been announced. Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment3c:Tf26,Int eg rat ion Atheists need answers from their insights too. So do jedis. And children in care OMA studio for Prada How do you explain a mystical psychedelic vision to a devotee of science? “There’s no magic to being a good humanist,” says Psychedelic Renaissance author Dr Ben Sessa who’s likely to have doled out some unconditional love in his time working as an addiction specialist, “kindness and compassion straddle all religions.” Though “I'm not a particularly spiritual person” he says, like most other Brits – hundreds of thousands of whom answer ‘Jedi’, referring to the mystic order from the Star Wars movies, when asked if they are religious in national census forms. Others enter ‘heavy metal’ . But the religious-style ‘peak experience’ is considered so key to treating addicts that ‘giving yourself over to a higher power’ has a whole step (number four if I remember rightly) in the 12-step program. Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) founder Bill ‘W’ Wilson was apparently thinking of exactly the non-denominational spirit of psychedelics when he coined the non-denominational ‘higher power’. “The psychedelic community puts itself out there as open and free, but they’re dogmatic about some things” Wilson’s inspiration, the philosopher William James thought that only religion was powerful enough to wrest a mind away from the demon drink. But so could LSD, which Wilson was treated with and espoused until AA pharisees put the kibosh on it. “There's no magic lost in psychedelics by just being a good humanist. Kindness and compassion straddle all religions” My Vital colleague Christine Caldwell of Diaspora retreat centre in Treasure Beach, Jamaica spoke about her scientific framing of peak experience in our study group. “Quantum mechanics teaches us that what we think of as our physical bodies and brains is just a slower frequency or vibration of the energy from which all the universe is made,” she posits. “And entanglement, created through the explosion of the Big Bang from which all energy in our universe was born, dictates there can be no separation within that field. Not only does entanglement dictate we exist as an evolution of the primordial soup in our connectedness, it also means what affects one can instantaneously affect another in an eternal dance.” That’s some solid ammo for the committed atheists. Mirroring the patient’s own beliefs is the goal in MDMA-AT though, and they could range from ‘lapsed high elf’ to devout Neo-Satanist. “Patients are equally likely to talk about Social Services as they are chakras” Normalising the peak experience on the patient’s own terms, like Dr Sessa avoided by not imparting his neurological frame on his patient who asked ‘Is this what love feels like?’ is key to its comprehensive integration. “I use universal language, meeting the patient where they are,” explains Sessa, “It comes down to: ‘What are your relationships with others? How are you getting on with people? Do your children like you? Have you got a job? Does your girlfriend like you? Are you a law abiding citizen that spreads love and kindness?’” The ebullient Sessa says therapists must be happy to go down a rabbit hole of any choosing: “If my patient wants to talk about Kundalini and chakras, I'll do that till the cows come home. But they’re equally likely to speak about getting their kids out of Social Services care.” We must be careful not to weave a new narrative of disapproval, insisting our own prejudices take the place of those we hold in contempt, insists the man who literally wrote the book on the Psychedelic Renaissance . “The psychedelic community puts itself out there as being so open and free, but they’re so dogmatic about some things” he says in response to evangelical mysticism on behalf of the space.3d:T5eb,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph of the Week Reactive vs sex-economic ways of working… From: The Function of the Orgasm, Wilhelm Reich (1948) My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: LSD Psychotherapy by Stanislav Grof Buy MAPS’ natty two-volume Way of the Psychonaut set If James Fadiman’s Psdychedelic Explorer’s Guide is the basic primer on Vital, this is the advanced text. I was saving up for MAPS’ natty two-volume Way of the Psychonaut (WotP) set but so many clever people mentioned LSD Psychotherapy off-hand in their lectures, and implored students to read it, that I followed the signs and grabbed a copy of the general 1980 release. I wasn’t disappointed. Within Grof’s reflections were the missing four corners of the jigsaw puzzle: LSD Therapy squared my impressions of the experience, its mystic and medicinal qualities, plus even putting on the the blindfold and ‘going under’. LSD Therapy features illustrated plates picturing art created on LSD by Grof’s patients, including a chap who, while others are painting tableaux featuring EG a rising phoenix, daubs cartoons about his wife and his car. I get the impression Grof books are like Smiths albums and crossover a little content-wise, so buy WotP rather than scurry around Abe Books snapping up what you can. Next issue: Dr Eduardo de Luna, Brazil’s top expert and founder of Wasiwaka Research Centre3e:Tdb6,My unofficial Vital Study Zine # 13 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space Noëlle Matip ‘Therapy’ San Francisco’s Veronika Gold set up the Ketamine Training Centre ‘emphasising the skills unique and germane to ketamine assisted psychotherapy.’ The MAPS co-therapist has written K treatment programs already in use across the USA. Her impressive CV includes somatic experiencing and EMDR expertise on top of academic psychology credentials. She works as an independent psychotherapist , and at stand-out San Francisco clinic Polaris Insights . Veronika has even curated a specialist ketamine therapy playlist . Her overview of the high street K revolution: “People get a series of sessions over to to three weeks which is usually what it takes to get the anti-depressant effect. Then they will come for what are called booster sessions: maybe every two weeks, or every three weeks, for somebody it might be four to six weeks.” Veronika plainly admits this is “Almost like an indefinite treatment,” but points out “for many people it’s still a preferable treatment compared to being a a daily SSRI.” We all love to rag on K clinics. But for the sake of successfully treating depression and alcoholism, please put snobbery to one side. Plus set-ups are likely to eventually incoporate MDMA and psilocybin treatments. So what’s happening now is a fascinating precursor to the future. There’ll be DMT on the go eventually. Precise therapy alongside ketamine (KAP) catalyses long term results, summarises Veronica: “The psychological paradigm has an emphasis is on processing the underlying issues and challenges that are causing the symptoms. We actually see healing and change that the booster sessions are eventually no longer needed.” Shamanic-style trauma processing with its ‘the only way out is through’ ethos can hit flabby westerners hard though. Not only during the experience itself but afterwards: “They have to face all the losses that were connected to being depressed after it suddenly lifts… perhaps not being able to enjoy relationships, or having relationships that are no longer working for them when they are not depressed.” If that’s anything like my own revelations after going on ADHD medication, it feels like someone else has been living in your body all this time. Veronika talks about her training program here , and see her on Psychedelics Today’s up to the minute ketamine therapy panel from earlier this summer plus more on the New Psychonaut YouTube Lecture channel . These five items I pulled from the week’s research are themed along Vital’s natural element-themed structure. Featured On the couch 2.0 Psychedelic snobs sniff at ketamine treatment. But many patients are raving. Consciousness expansion for the masses Does anyone really want talk therapy with their K? They do once they see The Death Door… Psychedelic overground Rugby lads on ibogaine, reality stars in hyperreality and tarot cards swapped for toys. Turns out the revolution will be fun. War and peace K’s used by combat medics but its ‘glutamate surge’ could hold victory for depressed civilians. As above, so below A fungus using K to clear parasites could connect the mental and physical elements of many diseases. Kool-Aid Corner #13 Your regular round-up of trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life. Next issue: Psychedelic Reanissance authour and top-flight global expert Dr Ben Sessa3f:T1295,Approach Psychedelic snobs like me sniff at ketamine treatment. But patients with lived experience say it works ‘Infused Vocabulary’ by False Negative Art There are now hundreds of clinics in the USA dispensing psychedelic-style treatment using what we used to call ‘regretamine’ (as in “I regret having that ketamine”) and ‘ROFLcopter’. Depression, PTSD and addiction, including for cocaine use disorder, are the conditions treated. Novamind’s six clinics in Utah expect a more than 200% rise in patient numbers next year, up to 65,000. Waiting lists are already two weeks long for a single infusion. While Spravato’s inhalers have become synonymous, lozengers are used too and an adjustable IV drip is considered the most workable method overall. In her lecture covering the K-clinic phenomenon, specialist ketamine therapist Veronika Gold told Vital students that a raft of approaches are required to suit patient needs. Treatment modes range from the purely medicinal, including Mindbloom’s at-home service , to a psycholytic take where therapy takes place during the trip, to the psychedelic approach nailed down by Stan Grof where discussion occurs between guided, internal drug experiences (this is Awakn’s method used in the UK). However, US insurance codes cover the substance but do not currently include accompanying psychotherapy. Patients’ strong reactions to emerging trauma on early trips have encouraged many dispensers to provide a sitter for inaugural unaccompanied voyages nonetheless. I’m a complete snob about ketamine masquerading as a ‘psychedelic’. I can’t help but feel gaslighted by the assumption. LSD has given birth to its own rich culture of art and ideology. Even MDMA (also not a psychedelic) gave birth to rave. Where, I ask, are ketamine’s contributions to the collective imagination? “I was able to go into the outside world without a sense of impending doom” Moreover. I for one, given my own history with this particular ‘medicine’, have been less than compassionately curious as to ketamine’s therapeutic worth, in comparison to what we now have to call ‘classical psychedelics’ and indeed MDMA. Reports are varied but most are positive compared to existing treatments. Many are euphoric; others a disappointment. I’m heading off for the sharp end of guide training in a month and it feels incongruous not be getting first-hand know-how of ketamine therapy too. Close-up of the IV bag used in ‘Infused Vocabulary’ by False Negative Art Thankfully, trustworthy circle buddies have, both microdosing and the full clinical shebang. Know what? Their verdict is… thumbs-up. Kelli Ann Dumas is a psychotherapist in my Vital study group. She received ketamine treatment after two decades working as a first responder in disaster zones, and with the US military abroad. While first responders do not require a PTSD diagnosis to obtain treatment in the USA, Kelli’s career has included the ‘direct threat to life’ instances this usually requires. “In the completing treatments rose joy. A positive, giving dynamic. Love and fire” She says of her symptoms, “My intrusive thoughts were of… being killed. I would live in fear of it. All the time.” After the first dose, “I was able to go into the outside world without a sense of impending doom. The intrusive thinking went away. Anger was still there though. And so were panic attacks.” The mental room she free’d up made for a beach head to assault these deeper issues, and Kelli got to work. “Before with PTSD I felt uncommon; only tight and damaged space inside,” she reports, “As my journey went on I was able to claim more of that space internally. When I did feel anger or fear come up, I could back into myself and feel safe.” Powerful senses of grief and loss followed as Kelli went deeper, taking lozengers alone amongst Louisiana countryside in her beloved RV with a therapist available remotely. “Love would arise instead and I saw myself journeying like I had in my earlier life – my energy crossing the land. In the completing treatments rose joy: a positive, giving dynamic… love and fire. This became solid inside of myself, instead of the fear.” Costly top-ups (weekly blasts add up) haven’t been necessary so far says Kelli: “When the tremble of the trauma comes I remember the call home, and am able to ride over it with my true self of dynamic proportions,” she says. “I don’t inward as much: integration with family is getting better, my exterior boundaries are getting better when faced with negativity.” Related reading Are ‘corporadelics’ doing enough for set, setting… and society? Saving lost souls for three million years. And now with MDMA40:T13e9,Therapy Do the public care about therapy with their infusion? They do when trips get intense From ‘K Hole’ by Ted Vasin Veronika Gold has a front row seat at the new psychedelic healthcare reality. The family psychologist worked on ketamine treatments at Cleveland’s New Pathways before heading to SF, training with MAPS and co-founding Polaris Insights . Unsurprisingly, when psychedelics hit the general public it can get quite messy. Never mind your neighbours falling down the K-hole – can you explain that it’s only ego death and it’ll be alright soon? (Encounters with Anne Shulgin’s (RiP) ‘death door’ may be more complex). “Even if you don’t agree with areas of psychedelic therapy, like the re-living the birth process and perinatal matrices, they can come up in patients. We’ve had girls go through that process,” says Veronica, who’s KAP program has been honed by what she sees in her treatment rooms each working day. Accompanying psychotherapy for ketamine treatment is not covered by US insurance policies, as things stand. Over here in the UK its benefits aren’t exactly stressed by, for example, London’s Safe Minds . Besides haven’t we all gone round in circles with our psychotherapists enough by now? “Patients might struggle with things coming up that conflict with their established beliefs” Compass Pathways exec, psychiatrist and ketamine veteran Dr Steve Levine, who’s treated over 6,000 people with 60,000 infusions, urges caution over ketamine’s efficiency without therapy , and shakes his head over standards on the off-label scene. One Vital student who tried out their local K-clinic said he was very much left to his own devices. “It didn’t necessarily engage in what I would consider best practices, preparation and integration, stuff like that,” he tells Veronika in her Vital lecture Q&A, “During the higher doses, I would get lost. I wouldn’t know where it was, what was going on, or I just didn’t have any sort of focal point, even with the music.” A study group fellow on a series of ketamine treatments tells me anecdotally, “You get what you pay for.” Veronika is of course appalled at rookies being left alone in drab treatment rooms. Attention is important for first-timers especially, she says. Most of all Veronica’s own Ketamine Assisted Therapy (KAP) program stresses flexibility. “The medicine may be too much for psychedelic therapy where they process internally, so you lower the dose and try a psycolitic approach with talk therapy while they are under a lighter influence. Or the patient could pull back from a shamanic experience where they confront the trauma, to discuss insights on a transpersonal level. They might struggle with that as things are coming up that conflict with their established beliefs.” It seems clinic staff need to stay light on their feet. “It was exciting to see that for some people, home treatment worked better” And, prepared. “We have a long intake questionnaire, we as well ask about trans-generation trauma, we ask about their birth process, we ask about you know relationships in their life, we’re asking about religious and spiritual history, discuss how they may want to be held,” says Veronika. Screening patients is key to unproductively disturbing scenes. “We have though, had referrals asking for the medicinal treatment alone who’ve had a difficult time and needed attention,” she warns. “We see people moving a lot, kicking, pushing, shaking off trauma physically,” says Veronika, “patients subconsciously feel more able to do this when they‘re not connected to the IV, so switching administrations can be useful too.” If the unwashed masses crashing down main street on K wasn’t concerning enough, moral guardians gasped when the pandemic struck and ketamine therapy was offered… via Zoom. “We weren’t sure how it’s how it’s going to work,” says Veronika, “it was really exciting to see that for some people it worked better. They didn’t have to end the session at the three hour mark, get everything together to leave the clinic, have somebody pick them up or take a ride home. They were able to stay in their space.” Sounds groovy. Vital student and first responder Kelli Ann Dumas, who talks about her own ketamine treatment experience elsewhere in this issue of the unofficial Vital Student Zine took her later lozenges accompanied only by her two terriers, snug in her beloved RV surrounded by Louisiana woodland. She thinks it wouldn’t have been as effective without applying her own self-healing skills, which range from to participation in ayahuasca ceremonies to frontline trauma counselling work and a transpersonal psychology qualification. “Pulling into the observing ego was my benefit,” says Kelli, “I’ve learned how to access an observing space, but that’s through years of yoga, meditation and eastern studies. Plus from my career I have advanced skills in narrative therapy. I don’t think someone without access to those would have as effective an experience.”41:T133e,Space Rugby lads on ibogaine, reality stars in hyperreality and tarot cards swapped for toys. Turns out the revolution will be fun Inevitably, models gather in St Tropez for a charity fundraiser hosted by Christian Angermeyer’s Aurora Institute With celebs like Sharon Osborn extolling the virtues of ketamine therapy get ready for the neighbourhood popping their heads through the door of your clinic. The psychedelic renaissance has flowed beyond the dinner party circuit on to the high street. Ketamine treatment is even more of a talking point than the toad thing . KAP got a shout out from UK TV’s Loose Women co-host Frankie Bridge (the striking one out of The Saturdays who had short hair) and Hello! mag went large . Dr Leary’s orbiting urn would spin at an angle that defied conventional physics to see trite psychedelic lifestyle design clichés replaced by… trite lifestyle design clichés . Sports stars have been hot on their daytime TV counterparts’ heels: gridiron megastar Aaron Rogers puts a late career surge down to ayahuasca and other football players extol psychedelic healing for concussion and stubborn injuries . Combat sports are beloved of thugs but played by gentlemen so being miles ahead doesn’t count. Even the middle market are getting out there. Gen-X footwear designer Patrick Cox spoke about his new life as an Ibizan 5-MEO DMT facilitator to Hadley Freeman in The Guardian this summer. Ever intrepid, Freeman ‘smoked toad’ [sic] despite her editor’s express instructions. A Vital study group chum undergoing ketamine therapy recently declared that sock puppets had been added to her clinic’s table of tripping props (with the spirit animal cards and crystals). She spent the session happily playing with them. Maybe this doesn’t sound ‘mystical’ enough to those of us with well-thumbed copies of The Tibetan Book of the Dead . Chatting away to the guides during the medicine experience, or wanting to go outside, can be a distraction from the work you’re there to do apparently. After you’ve come down you could be disappointed you didn’t get any of that done. I don’t disagree that it could feel like a waste of time for all concerned. “Wit is the ability to find hidden similarities linking two ideas which are contrasted with each other” But on psychedelics ‘what comes up, comes up’ to use the platitudinous truism. TV’s Dr Bill Richards, the veteran John Hopkins’ researcher featured in Netflix’s How to Change Your Mind said laughter “May be what’s needed” in his own Vital lecture . I rubbished Freudian psychoanalysis in issue #11 by ranting about how the only therapeutic system that’s been established as ‘fact’ for 100 years has poisoned our intellectual conversation and our mental healing. Turns out Freud wrote about the importance of humour in 1905’s The Joke and its Relation to the Unconscious. Before putting pen to paper he took the opportunity to discuss the subject with hilarious cards from his Viennese social whirl. The many positive conclusions included, ‘Wit is the ability to… find hidden similarities… linking two ideas which in some way are contrasted with each other.’ Laughter is the yang of meditative, non-dual understanding’s yin. The unconscious plays a leading role both in devising clever quips and responding to them in real time, without conscious analysis. On top of healing relational trauma , laughter and play in adults are also ‘ positively correlated ’ with increased sociability, spontaneity, tension release, innovation, de-stressing, longevity, immunity, energy levels, teamwork and parasympathetic nervous system activation . “Whether I was crying or laughing, was not too important” And never mind the cave paintings, because psychedelics gave us jokes. The 2021 research paper Psychedelics, Sociality, and Human Evolution says, ‘In particular, the interpersonal and prosocial effects of psilocybin may have mediated the expansion of social bonding mechanisms such as laughter , music, storytelling, and religion.’ LSDExperience.com a compendium of the finest, trip writing includes this anonymous quote: “Whether I was crying or laughing was really not too important, except on the conventional level. The important point was that the tree of my emotions was being vigorously shaken and liberated of some withered leaves which had hung on too long.” Spiritual emergencies, fearful reactions, and sudden life changes are likely to be of more concern for ketamine entrepreneurs and therapists than the number of mystical versus humorous experiences per week going down in their clinic. But not for nothing does the Bible call humour ‘the best medicine.’ It could be comparable to spirituality, or philosophy for coming to terms with complex and contrasting themes. At dinner, or on the high street. It’s legislators who seem out on the fringes now.42:T972,Medical Ketamine’s been used as an anti-depressant for decades. Its effect on neurotransmitter glutamate may hold the key to understanding mental health Vintage war poster from Antikbar Art Ketamine’s actually been used as an antidepressant for many years, even in the NHS. With D-list celebrities queuing up for ketamine, it’s even easier to write it off as a D-list consciousness expander. But that’d be both distastefully othering and ignorant of ketamine’s rich heritage. Ketamine’s disinhibiting dissociative ‘emergent states’ comparable to psychedelic visions were noticed during its use as a battlefield anaesthetic in the Vietnam War. As were similar visions caused by its predecessor PCP AKA angel dust. The effects were studied in humans back in 1964. Loads more scientific double-blind investigations have been conducted into ketamine compared to proper psychedelics. Ketamine could work even better when combined with a designer drug in the same family, cycloserine, used to treat tuberculosis and kidney disease. But ketamine’s authentic heritage treating mental health issues, plus its clarifying insights, aren’t all that’s worth bearing in mind before cocking any more snoops at the ketamine crew. 21st century neuroscience – and mycology – have dug up some astounding K-facts that endorse its use as a bio-psychological healing too. According to the superb Psychedelic Science Review , ketamine causes and mediates release of neurotransmitters in a ‘glutamate surge’ that essentially causes neuroplasticity. Ketamine could be “the most neuroplastic drug” as a psychiatrist commented in the Q&A after ketamine therapist Veronika Gold’s Vital lecture. Market anti-depressants only prompt limited aspects of this cascading process known as ‘brain derived neurotropic factor’ which isn’t dissimilar to the effects derived from healthy actives like cardio-vascular exercise. Un-mediated glutamate causes auto-immune and neurodegenerative diseases like ADHD, Parkinson’s and a raft of other conditions that psychedelics are associated with treating. Proper psychedelics are thought to do something similar but haven’t been lab-tested nearly as much as ketamine, so scientists can’t say for sure. Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment43:T927,In te gr at io n A fungus using K to clear parasites could hold the secret to the brain- body disease connection Bacteria operating in fracal patterns observed by the late Dr Eschel Ben-Jacob Pochonia Chlamydosporia is a fungus recently discovered to use ketamine for flushing parasites out of its host plant’s roots. Discovered and hyped only recently, there are two eyebrow-raising elements to this. Firstly ketamine is a ‘designer drug’, or as elite space commando and neuroscientist Andrew Gallimore wrote on Twitter , “a perfect example of a purely synthetic molecule. The arylcyclohexylamines, of which ketamine is the prototypic example, are a product entirely of the human mind… Oh wait…” Did the fungus get hold of it via the mycelial network? Is biology categorisable to the extent that a substance arrived at in lab tests can be naturally occurring but not yet discovered? Or did the Reality Switch Technologies Gallimore writes about come into play, somehow? Some ketamine killing parasitic worm eggs Secondly: Pochonia Chlamydosporia uses ketamine as an anti-microbial agent. A robust two-parter in Psychedelic Science Review dug out a 1987 study where ketamine did a great job killing bacterial heart lining infections in rabbits – and stopped the rabies virus breeding in rats. In 2002 ketamine was tested against market antibiotics and crushed Staphylococcus aureus, a common opportunistic bacteria that causes all kinds of nastiness, from pimples and impetigo to MRSA and pneumonia… and has become 80% resistant to antibiotics since penicillin was invented in 1943. The 2020 report from the un-putdownable Parasites & Vectors journal tested ketamine against agricultural anti-wormer ivermectin, which used to be advertised on TV back in the West Country to give you an idea of how widespread its farming use is. Ketamine performed equally well. But what has actually captured the imaginations of many in the space is that this means ketamine counts as a ‘plant medicine’. I eagerly await the complex mythologies, concept albums, groundbreaking scientific discoveries, artistic genres, philosophical insights, and bespoke geometric fabric designs that shall surely now emerge from the ketamine subculture, such as it currently is. Related reading Architecture is the trippiest job The Eagle and the Condor44:Tc3b,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph of the Week How a glutamate ‘surge’ (it’s more of a mediation than a wave) works through the nervous system: From: Ketamine and Serotonergic Psychedelics: Common Mechanisms Underlying the Effects of Rapid-Acting Antidepressants , by Bashkim Kadriu, Jessica R Gilbert, Ioline D Henter, Christoph Kraus published in The International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology November 2020 My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: The Trials of Psychedelic Therapy Grabbed it for £16 price now pushing £37 but bargains exist ‘The First Lady of LSD History’ Dr Erika Dyck says, “There is no other historical account that offers this degree of breadth on the topic.” Psychedelic Renaissance author and medical thought leader Dr Ben Sessa wrote in the British Journal of Psychiatry , “Shines a fascinating light on a discipline that is neither pure pharmacotherapy nor pure psychotherapy… Oram shows how LSD’s unique position has been, and still is, its potential undoing when it comes to obtaining formal licensed approval.” Published by John Hopkins University Press during the dark days of the early 1980s, Matthew Oram’s examination was undertaken away from hype or disapproval. The writer points out that the issue with approval is not only the ‘randomised controlled trial’ process that insists on a placebo, but also statistical compromises that arise from therapy provided alongside. That’s still causing issues to this day. Imperial College’s PsiloDep 2 is criticised because 35-plus hours of therapy were provided alongside the psilocybin. Oram writes that researchers were concerned about this in the early 1960s, when treatments combined physical, psychological and psychiatric methods as a matter of course. That didn’t last. Speaking in an interview for historian Andy Roberts’ book Acid Drops , 1950s British LSD researcher Dr Ronnie Sandison says, “When I started using LSD in therapy over 40 years ago the split had already started between general psychiatry and psychotherapy, and that divide has gradually widened into psychotherapists and psychoanalysts and an increasing number of lay-psychotherapists, all doing very good work. And then you have the general psychiatrists who have become more and more a victim of the drug companies. I really believe you can be a psychiatrist these days without having much knowledge of the mind, if you hand out the right pill to a patient.” Maybe he’s right. But psychedelic evangelists in the therapeutic frontlines are also better off considering why psychotherapy might not appeal to the customer, at least initially. I’d posit that expense and time off work are the main reasons, followed closely by disappointment in non-psychedelic assisted talk therapy sessions, where narrative psychoanalysis insists on a universal worldview that contradicts a patient’s lived experience. Next issue: Psychedelic Renaissance author Dr Ben Sessa of Awakn Life Sciences speaks, and we listen45:Tda8,My unofficial Vital Study Zine # 12 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space Jeremy Deller, ‘The Problem with Humans’ available here Gotta love MAPS PBC, the Multi-Disciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies Public Benefit Corporation. An MDMA ban in 1984 inspired its founder Rick Doblin to somehow keep the flame alive. Decades later, in July 2022 a letter leaked to The Intercept’s Mattha Busby implied the Biden administration are stepping up for country-wide medicalisation of MDMA and psilocybin. MAPS expects legalisation in the USA by 2024. MAPS is technically a ‘non-profit’ entity with a public benefit corporation bolted on. In June 2022 the MAPS C-suite was joined by Boston Consulting Group managing director Dan Grossman, and former Sandoz CEO Jeff George a managing partner at VC fund Maytal Capital, boardroom heavy hitters both. The ‘extractive’ big pharma model is under challenge, it seems, from empowered non-profits like MAPS and in the UK, Amanda Fielding’s Beckley PsyTech. “We facilitated out first Grof holotropic breathwork session where Vital is based near Vermont, with Vital’s patrons Lenny and Elizabeth Gibson” MAPS will be distributing its radical new treatment program, including its accompanying talk therapy, ‘ MDMA-AT ’, for free. MDMA-AT has obtained a ‘special protocol’ from the FDA so it does not need to be revised before MDMA itself is available legally. That’s an incredible achievement for the veteran healers who devised, wrote and guided it to American federal approval, Vital Week 12 lecturers Michael and Annie Mithoefer. The young Dr Michael Mithoefer was up to his scrubs in gore for ten years as medical director at the emergency departments of Charleston County and Georgetown County hospitals, North Carolina. He turned to psychiatry in 1991. The trauma specialist is trained in Internal Family Systems, EMDR and Grof Holotropic Breathwork. His wife and dyad partner Annie is a certified nurse and Hakomi therapist who’s also Groffed-up. The two have worked for MAPS since the early 2000s and are also on the advisory board of Bristol’s AWAKN; they’ve been to Ben Sessa’s house in Somerset. Check it out: Awakn’s Ben Sessa hosts the Mithoefers in Somerset, England “We facilitated out first Grof holotropic breathwork session where Vital is based near Vermont, with Lenny and Elizabeth Gibson who can’t be a hundred feet away from the offices right now, so there’s symmetry there,” said Dr Mithoefer to open the eight hours of workshops he and Annie graciously provided for Vital students. Here’s the Mithoefers on Psychedelics Today’s podcast , and on Aubrey Marcus for the bros. More on the New Psychonaut YouTube channel . And here’s this issue: Featured T-bombs away! MAPS has recruited The Body Keeps the Score author Dr Bessel Van der Kolk. Homestasis is where the heart is Seeing your shrink wil never be the same again after MDMA-AT. Drugs are the Love MDMA for couples therapy: 4/4 octopuses can’t be wrong. Inner space of safety MDMA boasts striking therapeutic properties beyond increased connection. Let them know it’s Saturnalia time Heal the world from collective trauma, says Thomas Hubl. Kool-Aid Corner #12 Your regular round-up of trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life. Next issue: Ketamine therapy thought-leader Veronika Gold direct from her bustling Polaris Insights clinic in San Francisco46:T2203,Approach MAPS’ latest recruit is trauma pioneer Bessel Van der Kolk author of The Body Keeps the Score ‘Gifts for the Psychedelics’ by Wardell Milan, works from David Nolan Gallery NY Psychedelic Renaissance author Dr Ben Sessa says ‘trauma is at the root of most unnecessary human conflict and misery.’ This summer, August 2022 topical spiritual teacher Thomas Hubl launched The Collective Trauma Summit ; he talks about activating a “collective immune system.” Trauma, on the scale from ‘victim of war atrocity’ down to ‘feel nervous when you see a policeman’, is up there with depression as global burden . According to the US Department of Veteran affairs it touches 350 million people worldwide. That’s in comparison to depression’s head count of 249 million. Trauma is thought be behind many conditions for which there are no currently prescribed medications or therapies: including post-traumatic stress disorder and its domestic derivative complex ‘C’ PTSD, plus substance use and personality disorders. “The results in terms of experiences, and the secondary analyses, are spectacular” Dr Bessel Van der Kolk , trauma trailblazer and author of The Body Keeps the Score , is overseeing stage three trials for MAPS MDMA-Assisted Therapy for PTSD in Boston. Back in the mid-2000s he told MAPS founder Rick Doblin, and program director Dr Michael Mithhoefer, not to try psychedelics for PTSD. Since then, Dr Van der Kolk’s become an avid convert: “The results in terms of experiences, and the secondary analyses, are spectacular… transformations that I have not seen with any other treatment modality,” he reports. The Federal Drug Administration has designated MAPS’ own MDMA-Assisted Therapy for PTSD program officially a ‘breakthrough therapy’, that offers ‘substantial improvement over available therapy for a life-threatening condition.’ “We have lost our minds. Here we have a chance to reclaim them” It wants to treat a million people every year and train 300,000 therapists by 2031. In keeping with its charitable vibe, MAPS is focussed on widespread availability, including for example BIPOC and low income sectors. The model will be available free of charge, and MDMA is out of patent. “To my mind, psychiatry lost its soul in its marriage to the drug industry as psychiatrists largely became a bunch of drug pushers,” says Dr Van der Kolk, “we have lost our minds; here, we have a chance to reclaim them. But boy, am I worried about profits. That sort of stuff can really get in the way of creating optimal healing environments. I’m really worried that people will do this by themselves or with friends or in unprotected situations, because you really open up Pandora’s box with MDMA-AT.” Dr Van der Kolk says he “…mainly joined at that point to keep things very serious and very strict. Because I had seen how it blew up the last time,” alluding to scandals from 2015 dug up by New York Magazine’s The Cut podcast and intrepid news hounds at campaigning news source Psymposim. “The results are spectacular… transformations that I have not seen with any other treatment” Undergoing MDMA treatment himself convinced Van der Kolk of its potency. “I was just lying there going, ‘Oh shit, are you sure this is a party drug? Because I felt all the pain that had been dumped on me throughout the years. People asked me all the time: How do you deal with all this stuff? And I always said, ‘Oh, as long as you have a good support system and as long as you have a good marriage and you have good friends, you get to talk about your stuff, It doesn’t really become part of you.’ Well, I was wrong. On MDMA, I got to see that indeed this stuff had come inside of me, burrowed itself into the very core of my being. And it has affected me, my perception of things.” While MDMA shrinks amygdala activity subduing fear, healing takes place by fully experiencing repressed thoughts and feelings, like during LSD and psilocybin therapy. Yet, “It’s quite different from a psychedelic,” says Dr Mithoefer, “The term proposed is ‘entactogen’ meaning it brings one closer to others and oneself,” comments on the decision to use MDMA, “but it’s not a new idea, in the 70s and 80s a number of therapists used it.” In his later Vital lecture, UK thought leader and Awakn chief Dr Ben Sessa says he believes MDMA is the best drug for therapy. “Processing trauma in therapy can be very challenging and painful. It’s not a cakewalk” When patients take MDMA says Dr Mithoefer, “There’s often more insightfulness and less perceived loss of control. It doesn’t tend to cause hallucinations, and people are more in touch with their surroundings than with psychedelics. However, even with MDMA this is all relative. If you’re processing trauma in therapy, it can be very challenging and painful. So it’s not a cakewalk.” What shone out to Dr Van der Kolk was the self-compassion, evolving rapidly into acceptance, that MDMA treatment accessed inside its patients. “They stopped judging and beating up on themselves. They had a sense of internal generosity, a capacity for self-acceptance: and with that, the accepting of other people. They’d no longer defend against parts of themselves they couldn’t stand… and project on others.” What would normally be ‘triggering’ leading to self-defeating reactions is purged from the system… once felt in full. “Part of functioning well is knowing what you feels, know, and needs to be done” Pioneering child psychologist John Bowlby famously said, ‘What cannot be told to the mother cannot be told to the self.’ Resulting from this inner conflict is ‘alexithymia – ‘experiential avoidance of emotions as an emotion regulation strategy.’ Canonical 20th century psychoanalyst Joyce McDougall called it ‘disaffection’, “an inability to contain and reflect upon an excess of affective experience.” The disaffected respond by ‘pulverising all trace of feeling, so that an experience which has caused emotional flooding is not recognised as such and therefore cannot be contemplated,’ according to 1989’s Theatre of the Body . This sounds like most people I know, to be honest. (McDougall also identified ‘normopathy’, the fear of difference). Alexithymia was coined in 1973 by psychiatrist John C. Nemiah, a Yale and Harvard Medical school graduate and editor of the American Journal of Psychiatry . Some folks think it’s just a personality trait; ‘guys who can’t express their emotions’. Poor emotional intelligence is certainly a hallmark. Sufferers can certainly feel ‘happy’ and ‘sad’ but have little vocabulary to examine or discuss their state any further. In their relationships they are distant, over-rationalised and lack intimacy. They often lack assertiveness, and make decisions without taking their emotions into account leading to a dissatisfaction they cannot pin down. This develops into dysphoria, ‘a profound sense of unease.’ One of the most difficult parts of my own ADHD diagnosis was the chapter in Gabor Maté’s Shattered Minds that told me I didn’t have an identity. “What you see in the MDMA-assisted therapy is that people have a self. They say, ‘This is who I am’.” Instead I was a series of behavioural diktats intended to please others, or get them off my back at least. “The latest neuroscience stuff in the area of trauma is very much about the loss of sense of self that comes from it. And indeed the vast majority of our subjects in the MDMA-assisted therapy study had terrible Alexithymia scores,” said Dr Van der Kolk on Norway’s Psykologvirke podcast, “as long as you live with caregivers who don’t see you, that really impairs your capacity to know who you are and what you’re feeling. This is very much part of becoming a well functioning human being: to know what this creature that you inhabit feels, and knows, and needs to be done.” Beautifully, “What you see in the MDMA-assisted therapy is that people have a self,” observes Dr Van der Kolk, “They say, ‘this is who I am. This is what I feel, this is what’s important to me. That’s what’s unimportant to me. And I’m no longer dependent on what you feel to dictate what I feel. I have my own feelings’.” More MDMA therapy articles here on New Psychonaut: Featured Trauma, addiction and MDMA therapy with Dr Ben Sessa Dr Ben Sessa’s book The Psychedelic Renaissance acted as exactly that. Indistinguishable from magic Psychedelics are the psychic antibiotic. Behind the mask MDMA provides lasting respite for the traumatised, says Dr Ben Sessa.47:T1b8a,Therapy Seeing your shrink will never be the same after MDMA-AT By Jeppe Hein on display at Albion Fields till 22 Sept 2020 MDMA-AT consists of three ‘blindfold’ experiences each a month apart. These are punctuated by fifteen therapy sessions dedicated to assessment, preparation and integration. Each stage – indeed, each appointment – includes a detailed, mindful strategy. The ‘inner healer’ concept is described as a the mind mending itself in the same way the body might gradually heal a graze or cut. The method and therapy is described as the dressing that might be put on a wound, providing the correct environment for the miracle of human evolution to do its stuff. Homeostatic instinct is the term used by men and women of science for the inner healer. Freud (who isn’t dead, it’s just a headline. Well he is physically of course) said instinct is a ‘demand made on the mind by the body’. Back in the renaissance Spinoza wrote that ‘Joy is associated with a transition of the organism to greater perfection’ as noted by top scholar Antonio Damasio. Could denial of our human instincts – personal drive, logos, awen , true will, whatever you want to call it – land us in a chronic long-term disease ward? Not serving animal instincts certainly does. “It’s only when the process begins that they understand” During the MDMA time itself, patients are encouraged to spend time both talking to the therapists and by themselves processing beneath the blindfold, “although we are focussing on the inner experience” says Michael, and discussions during the experiences are intended to facilitate “a self directed experience. They don’t even have to wear the blindfold if they don’t want to, but often they end up doing so.” Patients are shepherded towards their own “personal alchemy” to quote Michael, a bespoke therapy style unique to them. This can be cultivated by honing one’s ‘self energy’, a calm, curious and compassionate state that provides an emotional container for patients to open up to themselves. “Usually therapists have goals or ideas of where they should go, but the patient directs that,” notes Annie, “which can be difficult for some people – they want to be told how they can cure their PTSD! It’s only when the process begins that they understand.” The MAPS dyad and MDMA-AT designers quote psychology colossus, emeritus professor at Stanford and When Nietzsche Wept author Irvin David Yalom, who wrote, “The therapist must strive to create a new therapy for each patient, or strive to encourage the patient to create a new one for themselves.” Surprisingly perhaps, patients’ individual inner work often has a similarity to popular methods. One that come up in particular is Internal Family Systems (IFS) , where patients discuss talking to the ‘parts’ of themselves that play different roles in their ruminations. “The therapist must strive to create a new therapy for each patient” “We see again the value of allowing space and time for something unexpected, terrifying or beautiful, to come through from the inner healing intelligence” A patient who allowed themselves to be filmed for educational purposes discussed acknowledging, listening to, and comforting his aggressive/defensive self – Jungian shadow work, essentially. I asked Dr Michael Mithoefer in the after-lecture Q&A if he had suggested the method: “if I even had, I wouldn’t have described it as ‘shadow work, which is part of the work of Sigmund Freud’s protege Carl Jung’. I would’ve put it in layman’s terms.” ‘Imaginal exposure’ – fictional examinations of how thoughts and feelings may play out in reality – and ‘active imagination’ – using fantastical metaphors to better comprehend stark reality in classic ‘psychedelic insight’ style – are two methods patients turn to naturally. Call it a ‘Jungian archetype’ or a ‘spirit animal’, it’s imaginative right brain activity processing complex thoughts to achieve balance. “We see again the value of allowing space and time for something unexpected, terrifying or beautiful, to come through from the inner healing intelligence,” says Michael. “We’re clear that the process isn’t designed to suppress their symptoms… but get to the root” Transference issues can be used to highlight areas of behaviour to work on. Freudian psychodynamics, the examination of unconscious motivations, is still relevant despite me declaring ‘Freud is dead’ last week. Other methods patients organically, roughly, incline towards range from the practical such as somatic experiencing (feeling trauma in the body) and corrective attachment (establishing a healthy behaviour model) to the totally way-out transpersonal. “We’re keen to normalise transpersonal experiences, letting the patent know we won’t think they’re weird. Transpersonal experiences aren’t essential. Patients that don’t have them tend to do very well also.” What is impressed upon patients is that they will get the most benefit from leaning in to their inner turmoil, not suppressing uncomfortable feelings but letting them flow forth instead. Moreover, this is not entirely linear, themes can wax and wane in importance, and it might be unpleasant and uncomfortable in places: “They might get worse before they get better. We are clear that the process is not designed to suppress their symptoms, but get to the root.” The celebrated MAPS dyad call processing under the blindfold ‘going inside’. “They never have to, and we are aware when they are avoiding it and help with that. But we will say ‘maybe now is a good time to go inside’ when we think it’s a good point in conversation for them to process. If they come up with a connection themselves it’s more powerful – for example, ‘I notice every time I start talking about ‘x’ I ask to go to the bathroom.’ We explore that first before prompting them to go inside: ‘Would you like to experiment with that for a little bit?’ We make it clear they don’t have to hang out with something they want to avoid. It’a matter of is it needed at all, timing, and offering the option so it doesn’t sound like we’re pressuring them.” The hardest part, say the pair, who’ve worked with MAPS for two decades, is not barging into the process. “IFS creator Dick Schwartz [who’ll be talking to Vital students later this year] uses the acronym ‘WAIT’,” says Michael, “why – am – I – talking?” The therapist is not the ‘healer’ – that’s inside the patient. Defence mechanisms mean it can be a long struggle to help patients come to the conclusions that would benefit them: for instance, decorated commandos who refusing to believe that their PTSD could have anything to do with all the combat missions, or rape victims desperate to bury their experience. “One patient commented, ‘I now have a battle plan when before I was thrashing about in the undergrowth’,” says Michael.48:T9da,Space MDMA for couples’ therapy: 4/4 octopuses can’t be wrong Ithell Colquhoun, ‘Song of Songs’ via Unit London Can the inner healer mend a broken relationship? Next up for MAPS therapy program designers Dr Michael Meithofer and his wife Annie AKA ‘Annie and Michael’ in spacespeak, is MDMA for couples’ counselling. “We knew that MDMA was useful for communication… and some of the other anecdotal things about it,” Annie told none other than Professor David Nutt on the Drug Science podcast (where you can hear Dr Nutt, the David Attenborough of drugs, a UK national treasure say ‘Back to the show!’) Annie collaborated on the initial research for a new era in MDMA couples’ therapy with Toronto’s Dr Anne Wagner . The Remedy clinic director has come up during further investigations into juicy subjects two weeks in a row (sync). Last week it was in a call for further research into psychedelic treatment for borderline personality disorder (BPD) . Yet Dr Wagner is not the only intrepid sailor of the soul cooking up excellent experiments using ecstasy. John Hopkins’ university neuroscience department, not to be outdone, gave E to octopuses . They’d noticed ‘that octopuses and humans had nearly identical genomic codes for the transporter that binds the neurotransmitter serotonin to the neuron’s membrane.’ The California double-spot octopus is a solitary creature, barely interacting with others of its kind besides once a year, briefly, for mating. Even then the male uses a sex arm and it looks like mid-air refuelling. Would you believe though, that when researchers put the octopuses ‘in a beaker containing a liquified version of the drug’ according to National Geographic , they exhibited significantly more social behaviour? ‘Particularly telling, said scientist Gul Dolen, was that after being returned to their tanks at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute in Massachusetts, the octopuses went on to reproduce.’ During the Q&A after Annie and Michael’s lecture the pair were asked about giving MDMA to animals. After all, dogs are given anti-depressants. When I got my own chance to talk to them, I celebrated group ceremonial use of the ecstasy sacrament in the form of our rave culture then made a bad taste joke about giving MDMA to our pets hadn’t gone nearly as well. Now we know to shove them in a beaker of it. ’At no point did the octopuses ink, which would be a sign of stress,’ Dr Dolan told Nat Geo in response to all of our ethical concerns.49:T985,Medical MDMA boasts striking therapeutic properties beyond increased connection Chemical X , ‘Spectrum’ “I believe MDMA is the ideal drug for psychotherapy,” says non-nonsense Awakn founder and trauma expert Dr Ben Sessa. The exciting bits are MDMA triggers a ‘oxytocin-dependent reopening’ of a ‘social reward learning critical period’. It puts your brain in the state of early childhood and adolescence, when it establishes key neural pathways. The hypothesis is that dysfunctional thought patterns can be adjusted in this state. MDMA increases pre-frontal cortex activity like an ADHD stimulant, lowers activity in the amygdala ‘fear centre’ deep in the reptile brain, and is notable for its relationship to both dopamine and serotonin. It creates an ‘optimal level of arousal’ that is neither too little nor too much for the brain to process its thoughts and instincts. Added neuroplasticity helps memories reconsolidate so patients feel safer in safe settings, for example. MDMA scored strongly on PTSD patients with dissociative symptoms who often prove the toughest to treat. Trial data was consistent across the five test sites spread globally. Ecstasy was first named ‘Adam’ then ‘Empathy’ Trial subjects previously suffered severe symptoms that had resisted regular therapeutic treatment for many years. ‘MDMA was invented for shellshocked soldiers’ is a trope I may be guilty of falling for. It wasn’t an appetite suppressant either when patented by Merck in 1914. Forensic research into the German pharmaceutical firm suggests a humbler origins for the love drug as merely a stepping-stone towards developing an alternative to hydrastinine, used to prevent internal bleeding particularly in the uterus. The military nonetheless had it knocking around for whatever reason in the 1950s around the first time scientists tested MDMA on humans and recorded the results. These soon reached the keen ears of Alexander Shulgin, who says he first synthesised it in 1965. It was originally named ‘Adam’, and also ‘Empathy’. Patients during MDMA-AT are given 125mg of what the subculture renamed ‘ecstasy’ with up to 75mg of booster. Apocryphally, a friend who took part in an Imperial MDMA trial said it was hella strong. Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment4a:T142e,In te gr at io n Heal the world from collective trauma says Thomas Hubl 2022’s Medicine Festival in the UK My journalism network brother Matt Green is the author of Aftershock: fighting War, Surviving Trauma and Finding Peace (New Statesman: ‘Outstanding’ , Spectator : ‘A work of integrity and substance’, TV’s Bear Grylls: ‘Compelling, humbling and inspiring’ ). He examines collective trauma in his new blog Resonant World – and ways to heal it. Like the UK’s Medicine Festival whereupon he has hence returned. “I’m going to sound too idealistic and starry-eyed about what is basically a fun gathering in a field,” Matt reports, “But a core part of me knows I came away feeling more peaceful, grounded and inspired than when I arrived — and I’ve learned to trust that felt-sense more than my fear of sounding naive.” Matt, who’s on the environment beat for Reuters right now, worked as a war correspondent in Iraq and Afghanistan. He spoke on the launch address call for The Collective Trauma Summit 2022 (oh yes), cooked up by guru Thomas Hubl author of Healing Collective Trauma . Which features basically everyone from the wonderful world of 21st century wellbeing. “Trauma on a personal level is energy, on a collective level it’s a storm,” says Hubl, who talks about activating our ‘collective immune system.’ He maintains “it’s an important function of collective health and if we don’t even have it, that’s a sign of our health.” Matt addressed journalism’s part in mankind’s burnout. “The media is frozen, reporting what’s ‘out there’ as if it’s on a glass screen, stuck in a psychic sludge,” says the father of two married to a children’s therapist, “we’re ‘looking at broken glass through broken glass’ to borrow Thomas’ own phrase.” Us media scum need unconditional loving too, says Matt: “That’s true of journalists as much as the rest of us who were born into this traumatised society. Journalists are recognising they need to be healing themselves as individuals, having perhaps been part of environments that encourage trauma-causing behaviours. Clinging to the notion that objectivity could protect us, was a fiction.” When Sunday Times suits wouldn’t sign off heroic war reporter Marie Colvin’s expenses, hacks left a cow’s eyeball on the accounts desk in reference to the eye Colvin lost to a rocket propelled grenade blast while covering the Sri Lankan civil war in 2001 (it gave her PTSD). She sported her signature eye patch thereafter. Driven on by her own unique quest for homeostasis, Colvin died reporting under news blackout from the siege of Homs in 2012 when her building was hit by Syrian artillery. “Journalism can be a form of healing too though,” says Matt. Decorated foreign correspondent Dean Yates was shattered by PTSD after two of his team were killed by an Apache gunship crew. Wikileaks dug up pilot cam footage that made for difficult viewing. Yates beat himself up further for not making enough of a storm with it. Eventually he was admitted to a psychiatric ward. Now, Yates talks about his experience at edgy institutions. He and Reuters set up a blog site and mini-community where burnt-out broadcasters and wobbly world-slingers could exhume a bit of trauma by banging out some posts. “Slowly the culture started to change a little,” says Matt, “I’m not saying there isn’t a long way to go for the media…” My cousin’s in Ukraine right now with the BBC. The most traumatic my journalism career ever got was when I reviewed Ian Schraeger’s new hotel and the remote for the TV in the suite didn’t work. No it wasn’t. It was when a close colleague and I were on the wrong end of a corporate ‘moral injury’ and he killed himself. Not that I, he or anyone in that position was, or is, above such behaviour ourselves. Neither are we discouraged to be, like Matt points out. And we’re the lucky ones. “None of this is possible without a community system that offers support, equity and justice,” points out Matt’s fellow host on the Collective Trauma summit, heavyweight sociologist Dr Ruby Mendenhall . Her work highlights the need to address racism as a health crisis given its eventual, detrimental effects on health, lives and budgets. “Our own experience of trauma is not deep enough to feel deeper traumas holistically,” says Hubl of social engineering, “We provide properly; we see them as problems and patch them up with ideas. Yet there is an intensity of emotions we are not able to address.” Mendenhall’s work with communities in Illinois includes community wellbeing centres like those in Compassionate Care Frome , plus business incubators, career roadmaps and personal financial advice. When not kicking ass, Medenhall dabbles in poetry. Jotting down some rhymes has sort-of neuroscientific healing properties according to the summit’s Dr Laura Calderón de la Barca : “It’s using imagination as a container for healing. Beyond words alone, elements from the future and the past can meet.” Careful or I shall be forced to publish my Burroughs-style cut-ups .4b:T5c9,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph (or Fig.) of the Week Comparison of calcified pineal glands with ossified compact bones: From: Pineal Calcification, Melatonin Production, Aging. Associated Health Consequences and Rejuvenation of the Pineal Gland by Dun Xian Tan, Bing Xu, Xinjia Zhou and Russel J Reiter. Published in Molecules January 2018 My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: The Process by Brion Gysin £23 fittingly. Hardcover first editions go for £1500+. Naked Lunch author William Burroughs called his best friend and Dream Machine co-inventor Gysin “the only man I ever respected.” Gysin might be best known for ‘cut up technique’ a writing method used by David Bowie, Iggy Pop and Jello Biafra, much loved by English teachers. The Process is a dreamlike, luscious ‘spiritual novel’ like Dune. It’s set in the desert too (sync). and a tableaux of his own soul’s development. His groovy mates have affectionate cameos in it. Gysin is said to have tutored Genesis P Orridge of Thee Temple ov Psychick Youth in the mystic arts. ‘I could easily blast so much keef night and day I become a bouhali,’ his alter ego Ulysses O Hanson, a real-gone crazy, a holy untouchable madman unto whom everything is permitted, nothing is true.” Next issue: MDMA therapy with the dyad who wrote the MAPS program, Annie and Dr Michael Mithoefer4c:T7b7,Carl Jung, the Kemetic tarot and a regenerated wicca feature in Shadow Zine, a boutique publication from cutting-edge coven The High Priestxss.  Its editor, designer turned shadow sorceress Claire Yurika speaks to me atop the blasted heath of Zoom. Claire Yurika put the brakes on a glittering fashion career to focus on her inner work. “Allowing shadow to pass through a room brings softness, like switching from overhead office lighting to a lamp-lit glow,” is her eloquent description of life post ‘shadow integration’ . Psychologist Carl Jung, Sigmund Freud’s star student who favoured a spiritual and proactive approach to living, claimed the world would be a much better place if we all did the same.  "Shadow work could be explained as exploring life” Crucial to this effort was a merciless examination of ‘The Shadow’, the side of us that we suppress and deny. Taming these instincts involves earning their trust. Shaming them leads to frustration, and later madness.   “The shadow is where there is subtlety, and mystery” Dr Rick ‘Spirit Molecule’ Strassman stressed the importance of self-reflection to psychedelic therapists in his Vital lecture earlier in the syllabus. And at 2022’s Breaking Convention conference Magnificent Maria Papaspyrou ( The Psychedelic Divine Feminine , Institute of Psychedelic Therapy ), cited collective shadow integration as key to emerging from our liminal age intact. “Most of our shadow work is about fear. It's fine to be fearful of wasting your life. Investigate why that scares you” Shadow Zine is Claire’s polished, playful and practical companion for our own shadow work, published by her cutting-edge coven The High Priestxss in London. In my latest broadcast interview, Claire talks about how shadow work can save the world, slowing down, self-agency and ancient Egyptian magick in the cosmopolis.  Follow Claire on Instagram for more shadowy goings-on . Grab your copy of Shadow Zine here .4d:T10fc,My unofficial Vital Study Zine # 11 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space ‘White Light’ from Paul Cocksedge Studio “We have really explicit conversations about sex, about violence, about death and ego death…” Plus of course, “Paranoia, wanting to go to the toilet, feeling like you’re going to the toilet, and the physical bodily experiences,” says Ashley Murphy-Beiner, psychologist and guide at Imperial College’s landmark ‘PsiloDep 2’ trial, which sounds suitably like a Quatermass movie. Ashleigh Murphy-Beiner is exactly the sort of impressive individual driving the psychedelic renaissance: a mediation coach and Peruvian ceremony facilitator alongside her studies at Imperial College London, she’s noted for her research on ayahuasca for treating depression too. She’s talking about preparing psychedelic novices for their first trip on synthetic psilocybin, the active ingredient in old-fashioned magic mushrooms. It’s used mostly due to stigma around LSD. “We let them know we’re not going to judge them on anything weird… although they’re not going to do anything like that, because mainly they’re worried it’ll really embarrass them or, or cause shame,” she continues, giving a window into life with depression. Depression is a ‘global burden’. The main cause of disability and the number one reason for taking time off work affects a quarter of a billion people worldwide, and more in The West. One in six Brits are on anti-depressants, and US figures rose by up to 30% during the COVID-19 crisis. Doomongers will be pleased to know there are plenty more sad stats in this week’s ‘zine. Imperial College psychologist, meditation coach and ayahuasca advocate Asheligh Murphy-Beiner Can psychedelics cure long term depression where talk therapy and medications failed? Although arguably still spectacular in comparison to existing treatment, results are frankly not as good as those for psychedelic studies on treating trauma, addiction, and end-of-life crisis. That’s partly because depression mostly remains a mystery, with the widely-accepted ‘serotonin imbalance’ theory recently publicly debunked. Ashleigh calls the causes “biopsychosocial” meaning there are biological, psychological and social implications. Many patients have come crashing down to Earth when faced with the cruel reality of life in late capitalism. Preparation and integration are absolutely essential, say trial patient advocates Ian Roullier and Leone Schneider of advocacy group PsyPAN. Dr Rosalind Watts created a treatment model, Acceptance, Connection and Embodiment to cover the ground between secular dystopian life and the psychedelic experience. Results of psilocybin for depression trials so far though are certainly optimistic compared to market anti-depressants. A major advantage is that psychedelic treatment opens up the mind , rather than numbing out all feelings, like current anti-depressants are said to. Opportunity and relish can once more be a part of depressive’s mindset. Plus they can dump their daily regime of equally barely-understood serotonin pills with side-effects like a plummeting libido. This is one subject for which there is certainly no silver bullet. Here’s Ashleigh talking about ayahuasca , and the ACE therapy model used at the trials with Dr Ros, plus the ethics of the trials and therapy itself, and rounding up the trial results on the Chasing Consciousness podcast, all of which you can see on the New Psychonaut YouTube channel . This week’s topics arranged along Vital’s core learning pillars are below. Featured Feed your head Psilocybin patients “experience everything” in contrast to the emotional anaesthsia of SSRI medication. Freud is dead PsiloDep 2 used a new therapeutic model ACE devised by Drs Ros and Richards, with inspo from Stan Grof. A Love Unconditional Wanted: open hearts to hold space over personality disorders. Results Based Does psilocybin therapy for depression work, or not? IRL is a bummer Psychedelic integration doesn’t make for ideal water cooler chat in the office on Monday morning. Kool-Aid Corner #11 Your regular round-up of trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life. Next issue: MAPS MDMA-AT program designers Michael and Annie Mithoefer.4e:T1908,Approach Patients say psilocybin offers “experiencing everything” in contrast to the ennui of SSRIs David Shrigley, ‘Magic’. Works from Lougher Contemporary Depression is a problem. One is six Brits are prescribed drugs to counter it. But still nobody knows what it is, how it works, or how to cure it. This is in stark contrast to the popular narrative that ‘depression is caused by an imbalance of ‘“happiness chemical” serotonin in the brain’. The most popularly-prescribed anti-depressants ‘selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors’ or SSRIs regulated it. Apparently. Like you might conclude by the name ‘selective’ and ‘serotonin’. Or by reading research in respected medical journal The Lancet, written by senior psychologists at Oxford and Yale; although the average depressive is more likely to get the mis-info off commercial content blogs from psychiatrists. SSRIs have some worrying side-effects. Like nasty poos, even worse sleep, plus most notoriously loss of libido – which is no good if your relationship is already on the rocks because of your depression. Or your redundancy, which is a major cause of depression but not taken into account by the medical sector. Plus, the ‘medical model’ actually makes patients feel more stigma around their depression than otherwise. SSRI users report an ‘emotional numbness’ known medically as ‘SSRI-induced indifference’ with practical effects not dissimilar to depression itself. ‘Evidence indicates that a reduction in depressive symptoms may not be the single most important outcome to patients, but rather factors such as the ability to participate in everyday activities and return to work,’ says this British Medical Journal article from its 2020 Evidence Based Medicine special issue. “It was like the light switch being turned on in a dark house… [my] concrete coat had come off” But SSRIs do increase serotonin levels (like recreational ecstasy) although possibly reduce them long term (like recreational ecstasy). Plus – anecdotally – my close friends who are prescribed SSRIs do say “help take the edge off.” I wouldn’t want to go without my ADHD meds, which do make an enormous difference. But neither SSRIs nor my Amfexa go any way towards curing the conditions, only reducing symptoms. A balls-out report from UCL published only this summer, made headlines by highlighting the gap between this narrative and reality. And we know what happens when anybody does that. (Like I’m fond of quoting, in the original version of The Emperor’s New Clothes the child who points out the emperor is naked is banished to the wilderness. Not made king instead by a grateful populace, which is a modern alteration). The status quo brought out its big guns. Rolling Stone , once the organ of the counter-culture, spread muck all over author Professor Joanna Moncrieff (of University College London, one of the most respected medical research centres in the world, while Rolling Stone is no longer respected as a pop music magazine, just saying) pointing out her membership of the Critical Psychiatry Network ‘Which aims to “[mount] a scientific challenge to claims about the nature and causes of mental disorder and the effects of psychiatric interventions.” Like RD Laing . Rolling Stone also drew attention to, and those of a sensitive disposition please stop reading now, her reticence for… vaccine mandates, as expressed in an open letter to the British Medical Journal from NHS workers that she signed. The real problem was that some of the shrill left’s enemies on the shrill right, like Fox News rabble-rouser Tucker Carlson, agreed with the paper. I’ll stop before I get depressed. The point is: psychedelic treatment for depression counters the ‘emotional numbness’ of the condition, on or off SSRIs. In fact, the opposite happens. “It was like the light switch being turned on in a dark house, the concrete coat had come off,” said one PsiloDep Trial participant according to the vital presentation by Ashleigh Murphy-Beiner, a psychologist on the trials and facilitator of its dedicated ongoing integration circle. Another trial patient said: “I allow myself to experience everything, even if it’s sadness. Now I know how to deal with my feelings rather than rather than repress them.” Why? “Oceanic boundlessness” AKA increased connectivity, the mystical trip accompanied by profound meaning, “going beyond the self”, and resolution of emotions (it’s usually shame according to Murphy-Beiner) by mini-spiritual emergency-cum-challenging experience are the top signifiers. This is before we discuss the default mode network, neuroplasticity, or neurogenesis. The ‘inner healer’ or ‘homeostasis principle’ to use its new scientific name dispenses these as required. If depression can be cured by restoring powerful human instincts like connection and meaning, is it caused by a lack of them? Former narrative cheerleader yet admittedly rather good writer Johann Hari made his comeback from exile with Lost Connections: Uncovering the Real Causes of Depression – and the Unexpected Solutions (here’s the TED Talk). Therein he claimed, backed up by doctors and patients, that depression is mostly caused by our bureaucratic dystopia: “the depression of many of my friends, even those in fancy jobs – who spend most of their waking hours feeling controlled and unappreciated – started to look not like a problem with their brains, but a problem with their environments,” he writes. And well done him. Although depression is not my area, and I’m far from qualified as a pro, it’s very tempting to agree. But if the problem isn’t brain chemistry but civilisation itself, isn’t sending depressives back out after psychedelic treatment into the same desperate non-life that made them so desperate in the first place just going to make them depressed again? At this point one can only make a fart joke, and nobody can get away with that better than proper brain box Dr Chris Timmerman, who tweeted this new report Understanding the effects of serotonin in the brain through its role in the gastrointestinal tract because it describes psychedelics as ‘cognitive laxatives’. Related reading Are ‘corporadelics’ doing enough for set, setting… and society? Saving lost souls for three million years. And now with MDMA4f:T15bc,Therapy ‘ACE’ is a new therapeutic approach devised by Drs Ros and Richards, with inspo from Stan Grof ‘Icosahedron’ by Anthony James from Unit London Freud is Dead. And we have killed him. My loose understanding of the gossip in the ivory towers of psychology is that Freudian psychoanalysis maintains an iron grip on legitimacy. This seems to have crumbled almost overnight like empires do. Psychoanalysis’ spiritual home The Tavistock Clinic has been rocked by scandal . And Imperial College didn’t use psychoanalysis as such in PsiloDep 2. Because it’s only been an initial part of psychedelic therapy as documented by Stanislav Grof. Indeed Grof’s former colleague, TV’s Dr Bill Richards who’s still kicking it himself at John Hopkins (and on Netflix) advised on Acceptance, Connection and Embodiment (ACE) therapy, the model applied by Imperial College in its landmark trials testing psilocybin against a market SSRI anti-depressant. “The trials followed a standard psychedelic psychedelic therapy format: preparation, the high dose, and then integration alongside an Acceptance and Commitment Therapy [ ACT ] adapted model,” relays Ashleigh. ACT is a kind-of proactive mindfulness to encourage ‘psychological flexibility’ an adaptive mindset resilient to stressful events. The psychological flexibility model or PFM is referred to in the title of Dr Ros’ stealth bomber of a paper, The use of the psychological flexibility model to support psychedelic assisted therapy which points out the approach is in use in trials at NYU and Yale, too. And guess what? Everyone prefers it to being told stuff in the past they were doing their best to forget has ruined both their present and future, so it’s going to cost them £200 a week. Plus, ACT’s explanatory infographic is a freaking icosahedron , the sacred geometric form that’s like a 20-sided Dungeons & Dragons dice. Acceptance and commitment therapy’s ‘hexaflex’ graph ACT is empirically proven in all of these tests we’re beginning to think will be endless, and approved by EG the NHS. “It’s a very complex experience that people are going through. So we’re using lots of different influences” But because ACT’s not Freudian analysis, it gets crap from the old guard. Seems like nobody cares what they think any more, though, because their way hasn’t worked, except for them. And they gave kids gender reassignment. That’s not all. “As clinicians, we were drawing on a lot of different psychological theories to support people because it’s a very complex experience that people are going through. So we’re using lots of different influences,” says Ashleigh. ACE is Dr Rosalind ‘Ros’ Watts’ remix of ACT. It even has P-ACE (for preparation) and I-ACE (for integration). It includes aspects of polyvagal theory, lived experience and non-dual thinking to name but two. And there’s even deferral to the inner healer or ‘homeostatic instinct’ to give it its new scientific name in ACE. Metaphors employed for the healing process include ‘ diving for pearls ’ illustrated by specially prepared visualisers. Plus, let’s not forget, a new ambient John Hopkins’ LP bespoke-made for the trials . “We’re asking people to open up to emotional pain at a pace they may never have experienced” Stan Grof says psychoanalysis was useful for the earliest stages of treating in-patients, but soon gave way to even more fundamental realms of the psyche – and body – that required knowledge not only of cutting-edge thinkers. “I wonder how possible it is to grasp” He names William Reich for perinatal matrix III when the body spasms start (not seen many of those on the course yet) and Jung in his Red Book days, but the ‘ transpersonal ’ (IE weird), plus theology, literature and philosophy too. “We invite them to tap into a sense that there may be wisdom and guidance to be learned from emotional pain, and difficult experiences in life,” says Ashleigh. There’s practical considerations that don’t come up in that room your therapist has in Finsbury Park with the knitted throws and knackered dreamcatcher on the ceiling. “We’re asking people to open up to emotional pain, to an extent, and at a pace they may never have experienced before,” says Ashleigh, “I wonder how possible it is to grasp. We wrangled over what we tell people beforehand, so they can make an ethical and informed decision about taking part in a treatment like this.” ‘Must we ourselves become gods simply to appear worthy of it?’ opined Nietzsche upon his most famous line, ‘God is dead.’ The firebrand philosopher meant a sense of shared, guiding ideology rather than the monotheistic biblical concept of God. He was mostly right, because us stupid normies did come up with a new God – science. The bits of that which considered our relationships to each other, so the only ones that counted, originated from Sigmund Freud, and Richard Dawkins via Charles Darwin. The new anti-religion preached a mirror image of historical spirituality: humans were essentially chimpanzees, except cleverer, so even more unpleasant to each other. Arts, achievement, compassion, shared laughter… all just tactics in the game to get ahead. Beneath it all we were just throwing our turds at each other, and pretending not to enjoy getting screwed by the alpha male. Who hasn’t been seduced by this perverse science at some point? Especially on cocaine, like Sigmund Freud was half the time. Eventually though it gets… depressing.50:Td39,Space Wanted: open hearts to hold space over borderline personality disorder From ‘ Dappled Light ’ by Rana Begum showing till September 2022 at Ptizhanger Manor and Gallery If there’s a subject in mental health that’s lively as psychedelics, it’s borderline personality disorder or BPD. Things got even stormier when the two got together. Or rather, didn’t. Psychedelic hierophant, Imperial College’s Dr Robin Carharrt Harris ruled personality disorder sufferers out of psilocybin trials in the earliest stages of reporting. Interpersonal relationship issues might prevent these voyagers achieving a necessarily productive therapeutic relationship with their guides, hindering ‘letting go’ to the experience. Asked about respite for personality disorder sufferers in the Vital Q&A about her work at Imperial College with psilocybin, Ashleigh declares she certainly hopes so. She highlights a courageous academic appeal by Toronto’s Rick Zeifman, and Anne Wagner of the city’s Remedy clinic, on the subject. The paper notes how clinically-proven effects of psychedelics, like increased mindfulness, a clearer sense of identity and behaviour, healing addictions and a reduction in suicidal tendencies line up neatly with BPD’s issues. The impressive doc proposes possible treatment angles including dialectal behaviour therapy (DBT) a socratic method invented for BPD, plus transference-based therapy (big up the space holders there). It also cites a bunch of examples where BPD symptoms were markedly improved by psychedelic treatment: MDMA looks like the front-runner for medical modality, but Swiss researchers say many came to them seeking LSD treatment for narcissistic personality disorder (NPD) in the late 80s and 90s with no major reported issues. Say what you like about them, but anyone turning up for LSD therapy saying “I’m a massive abusive narcissist, please help me” has done their shadow work. Moreover, just recently doctors in Basel claimed success when treating a complex personality disorder with LSD and MDMA. “This decision was not taken lightly,” reads the abstract. There’s currently no medication for BPD but sufferers can be prescribed for co-morbidities. Savage psychological wounds, acute trauma, prompt intense abandonment fear in BPD sufferers, possibly leading to volatile and self-sabotaging behaviour. In a thoughtful article on BPD from multiple award-winning UK Cosmopolitan mag, expert Dr Dawn Starley levels it all out by reminding smartphone shrinks that by no means all personality disorder sufferers are disruptive. Moreover, any perceived cruelty, mind games or violence come from a place of terror rather than sadism. Words like ‘guilty’ and ‘innocent’ are perhaps not nuanced enough (sync!) to describe a BPD court defendant (certainly a diagnosed one). And neither is, for example, ‘ manipulation ’, says BPD specialist Dr Susan Heitler. Equally, “[Partners, friends and family members] can experience feeling abused or gaslighted themselves. The negative experience for some is substantial,” she says. It’s natural to want to help a loved one in trouble. Selfishly wishing your lover would just get better is forgivable too. But the two of you are often better served by staying apart. This is non-dual acceptance at its starkest. Related reading Can you hold your own? Cosmic Midwifery51:Tc23,Medical Does psilocybin therapy work, or not? Kirsten Liu Wong, ‘How Fast the Shadows Fall’ Does psilocybin therapy soothe depression? The short answer is yes. But don’t go getting all ‘salvation fantasy’ on me now. Kick ass John Hopkins studies out earlier in 2022 claimed more than half of test subjects suffering from major depressive disorder were in remission (statistically cured) after treatment and a year later , after eight hours of prep (with Bill Richards, mind) and two doses, with five follow-up appointments. Which is… mind-blowing. Imperial’s comparison to SSRI escitalopram ‘PsiloDep 2’ ran into some IRL type stuff when the scale it used turned out to give mediocre – well, equal – results. Other scales fared far better. But symptoms returned within three to six months. Is it fair to say that “the miracle cure thing ain’t gonna stick” as Rick ‘The Strass’ Strassman laid down in his own Vital lecture? “Some will want longer term therapy, to understand or change things in a way that others may not” Several patients went back to SSRIs. “For some people, psilocybin was very powerful,” says Vital lecturer Ashleigh Murphy-Beiner, who acted as a guide on the trials, “They’re quite okay with saying ‘that’s enough for now’. Others lived with the symptoms of depression in a new way, probably the majority, actually, did. The psilocybin brought relief.” NYU trial subject Court Wing defended PsiloDep 2 on Psychedelics Today, saying he “ received incredible benefits – my depression of five years went completely into remission and has remained there.” Depression is one of humanity’s worst problems, barely understood. It’s a bit consumerist of us to think somebody’s suddenly sorted it, in such a romantic fashion. For now we can only defer to the inner healer, wish godspeed to the guides, researchers, and patients, then get our Forest Passage on. “The longer term option will be costly” From the sharp end, Ashleigh says: “I hope all options are available to people, to work very differently with the experiences that they’ve had in life. Some will want longer term therapy and really get to the roots, understand or change things in a way that others people may not. A shorter treatment or less intensive psilocybin therapy might be sufficient for them. I’m worried that the longer term option will only be available privately [not via the UK National Health Service], because it will be costly of treatment. And I’d really like the longer term treatment to be available at an affordable cost.” Thought leaders like Dr Ros evoke 12-step-esque community circles. But, Ashleigh observes, “There’ll be a push to making shorter term treatments like we have in traditional talking therapies already now, because of budgets, and funding. The people that want to resolve aspects of their mental health experiences are disadvantaged by that.” Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment52:T1015,In te gr at io n Returning to everyday existence brings depression patients right back down Nick Cave ‘Soundsuit’ at In the Black Fantastic Hayward Gallery till September 18 Psychedelic integration isn’t the ideal topic for water cooler chat with your line manager on a Monday morning. Meditation, vegetarian diets, forest bathing and volunteering, all inspired by the cosmic visions on a magic mushroom trip. It all sounds suspiciously like hippy stuff, guaranteed to create even more disconnect between you, your news cycle-bedevilled colleagues, wine-guzzling borderline alcoholic partner, and rigid family. “Most of the people I’ve worked with have had a disappointing crash. Integration is partly about managing that disappointment. You can’t separate the drug from the therapy – and the community you go back to after a session,” said Dr Ros, AKA PsiloDep 2 clinical lead Dr Rosalind Watts at Psych Symposium’s integration panel earlier this year also featuring Ian Roullier, co-founder of trial subject support and campaigning group PsyPAN . “My colleagues think it’s extreme… whacky” PsiloDep 2 trial subjects were given 35 to 40 hours of therapy, which is more than I’ve had in my life. But costs, for a start, kept post-experience integration services light. The trial subjects’ woe prompted Dr Ros to manifest ACER, her integration platform that “involves getting into nature and a closely bonded support group, that’s saved all of us during the pandemic,” says Roullier. Former international-level professional sportsman and Iboga advocate Rory Lamont was on the panel too. played rugby, a traditional contact sport that’s notorious for its conservative values. He only had the informal WhatsApp group set up by the folks on his retreat for succour. “I went through some difficult challenges post experience,” he told the panel, “The connection with the medicine is just the start: we want to embody the insights but if we’re not being met by our family and friends it’s isolating and can bring back the loneliness, and the depression.” The new approaches his insights compelled him to take were nightmarishly distant from his existing lifestyle. “These medicines get to the root of our suffering, the trauma and disconnection from family, friends, society,” he says, “Instead we get a connection to mother nature and community, that brings about the profound healing.” After the experience is over though it’s straight back to ‘real life’, such as it is. Most of my colleagues think it’s extreme, whacky,” says Lamont. “The worst part is when you feel the effect fading, and you can’t access it any more” PsyPAN co-founder Leonie Schneider says psilocybin was “the start of a long healing process which I’m very grateful for, but it’s quite a thing to be involved in. I didn’t get the ego death, the mystical experience, and came out slightly disappointed. But I got some other, incredible things that we wren’t what I expected.” Schneider may not have been able to get those benefits without experienced integration support. Ian Roulllier also took part in Compass’ psilocybin trials, where “my depression came back as soon as the drug wore off. But there was a strong focus on integration with a group centred on Maudsley Hospital [where Compass and the UK NHS public healthcare provider are building a dedicated centre in woodlands of New Bethlehem AKA ‘Bedlam’ asylum].” The drugs are catalysts and require the integration to have long-term tangible effects, says Roullier. Trial subjects can’t breeze into Imperial for another heroic dose top-up, “The worst part is when you feel the effect fading, and you can’t access it any more.” Although there were moments of oceanic boundlessness. “The best is every now and then I check in, and just go out on the grass, and feel it under my feet,” muses Roullier, movingly and sincerely, “But I did get attacked by a swarm of wasps once. I thought, am I still tripping?” Related reading Architecture is the trippiest job The Eagle and the Condor53:T5e2,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph of the Week Panic over, someone’s sorted the whole ‘fly agaric is stronger once it’s gone through someone else’s bladder’ question Direct Analysis of Psilocin and Muscimol in Urine Samples Using Single Drop Microextraction Technique In-Line with Capillary Electrophoresis by Anna Poliwoda, Katarzyna Zielińska Piotr P. Wieczorek published in Molecules spring 2020. My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: Shroom by Andy Letcher From WoB for £9.99, there are ones with slightly better covers out there It’s a lecture circuit gag that one of the best books on the history of psilocybin has a really crappy cover. Andy Letcher, writer of Shroom, is a high-level druid here in Britain. His rigorous taxonomy of magic mushrooms within society comes with shadow work: it debunks myths and sacred cows, in particular the stoned ape theory, left and centre. This paraphrase from author will Self, in his review of Terrence McKenna’s Food of the Gods is possibly the shadowiest bit: “he compares McKenna’s [worldview] to Marxist dialectical materialism, where the type of drugs you take determines the society you live in: mushrooms good, alcohol bad.” Want more? “Indegenous communities are rarely harmonious, and use ayahuasca to curse as much as cure.” Essential. Next issue: MDMA therapy with the dyad who wrote the MAPS program54:T13ff,My unofficial Vital Study Zine # 10 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space From Phantom VII by Neil Krug “We don’t rush to sign up for ethics classes,” says Kylea Taylor, a storied therapist who’s become the conscience of the psychedelic renaissance. But you’d be surprised, she says: “All our great tales and stories are concerned with dilemma, redemption and ethical themes. The field can be surprisingly interesting and worthwhile, plus you learn a lot about yourself.” ‘Ethics is the study of relationship’ says Taylor’s website for her InnerEthics program detailed in her respected book The Ethics of Caring . If we are defined by our interactions, then ethics are a crucial part of our existence. Taylor, I’ll point out, is no out of touch pharisee. Graduating in marriage and family therapy in the late 1960s, she worked as an addiction specialist throughout the 1970s including nine years in a residential rehab. She’s been with the Grof Foundation since the 1990s having trained there since 1984 (she calls them “Stan and Christina” at one point which is way cool). “Self-compassion and self-work are absolutely key” These days it’s not only addiction counsellors and psychedelic pioneers who sometimes deal with tricky individuals. Not for nothing are self-books with titles like The Five Types of People Who Will Ruin Your Life all the rage. It turns out that ‘drawing boundaries’ which we’ve all been told is the secret to negotiating life by our (childless, spouseless, mostly jobless) therapists, doesn’t actually work against bastards. Or if not bastards then the folk who’ve worked out they can make their ethics up as they go along, mostly – in a world where God is dead and Alfred North Whitehead is yet to be a household name. “Ethical relationships are the relationships that are healing” Taylor tells of an acquaintance, a qualified and licensed female therapist, who dabbled with holotropic breath work and shagged a long-term male client who she’d had an intense session with. He sued her and she lost everything. “Why did this happen to a good, well-intentioned, well-trained therapist?” says Taylor, “because we need to discover as much as we can about our motivations, be completely sensitive to client safety, and educate ourselves about extraordinary states.” It’s not difficult to accept that psychedelic drug use and exotic religious ceremonies might get a bit sketchy sometimes. Denizens of the underground learn to pick their way around the gloom; some though trip over, into the murk. Go down into the Power Trip podcast rabbit hole for New York Magazine’s exposé series covering both the nascent scene and recent trials at MAPS, where perfection is absent even in the most optimistic of scenarios. “If clients feel trust they’ll be more willing to go into strange spaces” Because we are human, reminds Taylor. She’s trained with Stanislav Grof’s Foundation since 1984. He wrote in LSD Therapy that we should strive to be more than human nonetheless, and Taylor thinks so too. “Self-compassion and self-work are absolutely key,” says Taylor, who advised on MAPS’ new Code of Ethics. Current ethical codes don’t examine therapist motivations, and certainly not higher states of consciousness. While we must grill ourselves on our own weaknesses, we mustn’t overly admonish ourselves for mistakes in a new, difficult arena. “We turn up the volume in psychedelic therapy. All internal and relational dynamics present have more impact for the client. Thoughts, words, feelings and intuitions affect the client and the therapist, much more than in a regular therapy session,” warns Taylor. Kundalini is one of her fields and she advises to look out for spiritual emergencies of both the dramatic and everyday kind: “realisation of cognitive dissonance can be a huge shock for many.” Self-work leads to self-realisation, self-compassion, stronger boundaries, and a finer relationship with others. It makes a psychedelic therapist better at their job. “Ethical relationships are the relationships that are healing. If clients feel trust they’ll be more willing to go into strange spaces and approach difficult feelings,” says Taylor. Here’s what else I flagged up, colour-coded to Vital’s themes of Approach, Therapy, Space Holding, Medical and Integration. Featured Power to Empower Inner journeys require deft guidance deployed with subtlety, says Kylea Taylor. Who’s therapy is it anyway? Probe your own intentions, for the floor of the abyss is littered with wounded healers. Nothing beats lived experience Only by learning on the job can guides figure out how to deliver ethical psychedelic therapy. Unconditionally loving cuddles: Yes or No? What if the patient would benefit from a clasp of the shoulder ot supportive hug? Easy tiger… Impeccable you Psychedelic therapists need to do good and look good, on CCTV and elsewhere. Kool-Aid Corner #10 Your regular round-up of trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life.55:Te2b,Approach Inner journeys require deft guidance deployed with subtlety From Seascapes by Paul Rosteau published by Loose Joints Talismanic underground figure Leo ‘The Secret Chief’ Zef began his psychedelic guide self-training using talk therapy in his voyagers’ sessions. Eventually he wrote, “I realised I didn’t know what they needed and neither did they. Something inside them did. Just leave ‘em alone!” Photos of the general public tripping in blindfold-and-headphones under strip lighting prompts revulsion in recreational users – or it did in myself, certainly. Stanislav Grof, ‘The godfather of LSD’ according to its inventor Albert Hoffman, who ‘nobody has contributed as much to the development of my problem child’ explains in his landmark work LSD Therapy that he went through a similar thought process as a researcher in the 1960s and 70s. The simultaneous model,‘psycholytic therapy’ Grof says does have its advantages compared to regular psychoanalysis, cutting treatment times by a third. But the doses he believes are too regular and possibly too small. Most importantly, the open-ended process has no focus on the rigorous analysis and integration of insights. “It will seem weird to them. Normalise. Don’t pathologise” Grof concluded that ‘psychedelic therapy’ which features three to four regular therapy sessions punctuated by high dose experiences where the patient mostly corresponds with their inner healer, While skilful guidance by the therapists can make impact, this requires elegance and subtlety. Vital Week Ten lecturer Kylea Taylor has worked for Grof Transpersonal Training since the 1990s. Like veteran Dr Bill Richards back in Week Four, she says the number one thing to keep in mind is the existence, and the potency, of the inner healer. In an ethical context this means trusting the client’s relationship with the process more than yourself. “Work at the speed of safety. Move at the speed of trust” Creating a sense of permission to unfold, “the power to empower” is a very different role to that of the modern psychotherapist, who in my own experience prefers their narrative to any individual ones. Let alone any insight dispensed by cosmic visions. “Normalise, don’t pathologise,” says Taylor, “It will seem weird to them, outside their own frame of reference.” While I absolutely agree this will be true for some voyagers, I’m inclined to believe plenty of others will find their fantastical visions more compelling than a grim raking over of their early childhood, accompanied by a gentle shaming of any non-narrative impulses. Get out the Soul Collage , which is like a ‘make your own Red Book kit’. “Think, ‘How can I support this client to take their next step into freedom, where they can be fully who they are?’” Says Taylor, again echoing Bill Richards who worked alongside Grof for many years, this time with his ‘cosmic midwife’ allusion. Providing examples, stories and suggested reading are more appropriate than Freudian psychoanalysis, which can seem terribly pompous when you’re tripping. Just like all cokeheads. Stop gabbling like one right now: “Part of good attunement is not knowing what’s going on with them and attuning nonetheless,” says Taylor. And don’t rush it, despite the promises of miracle cures. “Work at the speed of safety… move at the speed of trust. Especially with clients who have a different life experience.” Related reading Are ‘corporadelics’ doing enough for set, setting… and society? Saving lost souls for three million years. And now with MDMA56:T93e,Therapy Probe your own intentions, for the floor of the abyss is littered with wounded healers From Phantom VII by Neil Krug The will to power exists even in the most open hearts: “Every ethical misstep has a healing impulse,” says therapist ethics expert Kylea Taylor. 73.9% of therapeutic professionals entered the field due to their personal history. The ‘wounded healer concept was flagged by Carl Jung, who wrote “A good half of every treatment that probes at all deeply consists in the doctor’s examining himself… it is his own hurt that gives a measure of his power to heal.” A psychedelic guide must wrangle with their reasons for being in the space. Achievement, hoping the voyager enjoys a significant experience, is a forgivable impulse; influence too if we’re being as honest like both the medicine, and the guide’s role, demand. “Mistakes are an opportunity for improvement and change” But the guide isn’t drilling the patient like a sports coach. Complementing the voyager’s experience is akin to dancing with them, says Taylor in the deft analogy she uses in her book The Ethics of Caring. “We do best in the dance when we are not ahead of ourselves,” she explains of letting the process and the client lead this technicolour two-step, “we are able to know what we need to know in the moment.” One must be instinctively aware of one’s dance partner, the music and the dance floor. “A foot in the client’s world and the other in our role of providing safety,” illustrates Taylor, “The container is the ballroom; others are dancing there too… it’s set and setting, preparation, relationship, and relational dynamics – and the psychedelic space itself.” The effortless presence of mind honed in meditation is considered the number one skill required for psychedelic therapists, claims Taylor’s presentation, and she is consulting for two different written codes of ethics currently in development. Taylor calls this ‘bi-modal’ consciousness. To me it seems quite demanding; out of reach of many perhaps. “Unawareness leads to missteps and sore toes,” says Taylor, “but mistakes are an opportunity for improvement and change.” Related reading Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill W’s LSD use inspired 12-Step and cured his depression Psychedelic therapy is an art first and a science second57:Tde7,Space Only by learning on the job can guides figure out how to deliver ethical psychedelic therapy From ས་གཞི་སྔོན་པོ་འགྱུར། (The Earth Turned Green) by Shen Xin at the Swiss Institute in New York until August 28 There’s no substitute for first-hand learning with psychedelic therapy says its number one ethics coach Kylea Taylor. Like sparring in combat sports, you can hit as many punchbags as you like but nothing beats the real thing. “Transference and intensity are triggers. What we’re trying to use emotionally, and what we connect to, can stir up our own sensations,” says Taylor. Only the act itself can provide the level of intensity and pressure to identify the areas where we need to improve, and do better. Yes, that’s Maria Sabina’s lilt you can hear fading into the background music to this article, as we ponder for a moment how psychedelic therapy evokes the indigenous lifestyle where there is no school and the only knowledge is directly acquired . Back to minding your Ps and Qs at the ketamine clinic. “We will get even more familiar with our own unknown material,” says Taylor of the necessity to walk the walk. “Be conscious of feelings in your body, energy… an opening of the trauma capsule within you” Because noticing when you’re off on your hamster wheel is hard. “We can’t focus back on the plan cos we don’ even know that we aren’t focussed on the plan,” says Taylor. To give one example, in complex post-traumatic stress disorder blockbuster From Surviving to Thriving Pete Walker describes the inner critic as ‘sneaky’. Just when you think you’ve got tabs on it, the utter bastard finds a way to express itself that even one’s Vital-trained, shadow-integrated self doesn’t put into the ‘twattish behaviour’ category – yet. Other ingrained patterns can be equally polymorphous. “Trigger management is the most noticeable area of sitting,” says Taylor who first began working with the Grof Foundation in 1984, “When we are sitting in a psychedelic session we are much more likely to have deep brain responses than in a regular talk therapy session. The older parts of our brain react much faster. If we are deeply triggered the reptile brain won’t consult the neocortex for what we learned in the ethics class.” For example: the amygdala fear response deep inside the oldest part of the human brain still has complete control over the senses of touch, smell and taste, only deigning to consult the past 200 million years of evolution on sights and sounds. “The more self work you do, the more you’ll recognise… and extend self-compassion” Stanislav Grof calls our internal mini-narratives ‘systems of condensed experience’ or COEX. “We must choose to come out of the COEX capsule and refocus on the client,” says Taylor, using the phrase “in process” to describe a therapist essentially acting out with the best of intentions. Compulsive behaviour of all levels is notoriously gruelling to identify and heal. Lack of awareness is intrinsic, and complete: like a dream, anger, or a PTSD flashback. So is humanity under pressure – the compulsion to succeed with a patient who reminds the therapist of the son they ‘failed’ to ‘save’, or the instinct to share a positive ideology. “Try to be conscious of feelings in your body, an energy; the opening of the trauma capsule within you,” says Taylor. As ever, “The more self work you do, the more you’ll recognise… and extend self-compassion.”58:T1053,Medical What if the patient would benefit from a clasp of the shoulder or supportive hug? Easy tiger… Ravers in east London Don’t put it past anyone’s shadow self not to get off with a pilled-up patient. That’s the message from therapy ethics expert, transpersonal psychologist and addiction counsellor Kylea Taylor. I’d hate to wipe any glamorous, lifestyle magazine-sheen from the Vital Student Zine. Yet seeing as this is ‘The Ethics Issue’ of Unofficial Vital Student ‘Zine it’d be remiss of me not to mention the sordid revelations to have swept the psychedelic space of late. First fell Francoise Borat, the French figure fancied by many more than myself. Women like Maria Papasyrou, Adele LaFrance, Celia Morgan and Reanne Crane are tackling the least agreeable and most necessary areas of the psychedelic renaissance right now, and Borat pioneered that. Investigations showed she lived up to her femme fatale archetype. The scandal also exposed the wellbeing industry’s appalling lack of oversight, from passing your email address on to cat charities to… not actually removing famous people from your public register after you’d struck them from the official register for shagging clients. The stink was mostly coming from Bourzat’s hubby Aharon Grossbard in the form of detailed and sustained allegations by counsellor, campaigner and award-winning blogger Will Hall . “Have a safe word. Even if it’s just: Stop” Next, just when you were thinking some boomers may be OK, MAPS therapist dyad Richard Yensen and Donna Dryer blotted the saintly org’s copybook during landmark 2015 trails. It’s worth watching the CCTV. Trial subject Meaghan Buisson, a PTSD sufferer who took the edge off her condition with a career in the tough sport of inline speed skating, then moved near the couple as her only option to continue treatment. Yensen and her slept together during the period. In 2022, welcome to a world of headlines like A psychedelic therapist allegedly took millions from a Holocaust survivor, highlighting worries about elders taking hallucinogens . Campaigning website Psymposia which produced the Power Trip podcast with New York Magazine that brought many of these stories to a wider audience, does a sterling if militant job of sniffing out stuff like this . Thing is, some patients really would like a hug during MDMA therapy. Recreational users might sympathise. Written and thoroughly discussed pre-agreements are the done thing, says Taylor. “Have the safe word, even if it’s just ‘stop’, and tell the patient, ‘Remember you can say stop’ even when you’re merely putting a blanket over them,” advises Taylor, “a lot of people are recommending a dual consent process involving a written agreement on touch, that is sacred and not changed in the middle of the session.” The subject should be fully felt through: “Explain the reasons why they might want it, and might not want it, and that if they say no now, they won’t get touched in the session,” says Taylor. California bioenergetics bodywork teachers have legal license to handle clients when required. Strictly unconditionally loving cuddles can be a productive part of emotional breakthrough, release and recovery, say many therapists. “A third agreement is ‘If you do ask me to touch you in the session, I will’,” suggests Taylor, “If they do want that, then watch out for obvious gestures suggesting they might require physical comforting. If their body language suggests it, then you might – for example – touch the back of their hand, and read their reaction.” It’s a jungle out there and not all accusations, unfortunately, carry complete legitimacy. Professionals in an area as unpredictable as psychology, let alone shamanism, expect accusation of some sort eventually according to Vital students in the field. Soccer players in the UK are advised to simply stay away from any form of ‘nightlife’ as it’s known in sporting circles, and most now do. Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment59:T1147,In te gr at io n I t’s n ot eno ug h to simply do good as psychedelic therapist . B etter lo ok go od o n the CCTV too This is jazz musician Sun Ra, definitely don’t turn up for a client’s first session dressed like this. Unless it’s your thing and they totally expect it. “The whole field of psychedelic therapy is at stake,” says Ethics of Caring author Kylea Taylor. Taylor graduated in marriage and family counselling, started on addiction services in 1970s, and worked in the transpersonal sector since the mid-1980s. I should think she’s seen it all. “We have to be impeccable, like supreme court justices – not just what we are doing but what it looks like we are doing.” An attitude bordering on the priestly seems to be required of the would-be 21st century shaman. Back at the ancient initiation, everybody in the village was in attendance and could keep vigil on one another: “Likewise in a holotropic breath work session where there are several sitters, and the issue of substance use is void,” says Taylor. The very modern trend for online ceremonies, with huddles, couples and individuals on a video call, offers a robust container of sorts, if a slightly dystopian one. “The role requires impeccable preparation for the client’s work in an extraordinary state” I pointed out during the Q&A session after a Vital webinar on harm prevention at dance festivals, etiquette between ravers developed organically and quickly in the heady early days of underground, intentional, ceremonial, group sacramental MDMA usage, during the late 1980s and early 1990s. That seems like very long ago. In the psychedelic therapy rooms, a new code of behaviour must be established during an age when there are few universal codes; and this in itself has become so confusing that it’s tempting just to assume everyone is following ours. Plus get terribly upset when we find out they aren’t. No wonder ‘ trust ’ has become the professional buzzword of choice. Fortune magazine just launched a newsletter dedicated entirely to the topic of trust earlier this summer, offered to subscribers every Sunday so the 1% can enjoy a hit of piety via smartphone. Companies where the staff trust leadership work quicker and make more money . “Trauma comes up for healing when people feel safe and the time is right” But reputation marketing firm Edelman’s latest Global Trust Barometer is titled ‘World in Trauma’ and declares ‘double digit trust inequality in 13 out of 14 countries’ meaning the mass population distrusts institutions significantly more than the ‘informed population’. The latter is not defined, but we all get the idea. This gap has reached record levels in the UK and France. With even daytime UK TV fitness coach Joe Wicks threatening to “do ayahuasca” the mass population of a world in trauma are likely to turn up at your informed psychedelic clinic. And they probably won’t trust you, but they do want to, and it’s downright key that they do. Because “the extraordinary state makes clients feel even less safe,” reminds Taylor. “Trauma comes up for healing when people feel safe and the time is right,” says Taylor, a highly qualified transpersonal psychologist, kundalini energy expert, and holotropic breath work coach. “The role requires impeccable preparation for the client’s work in an extraordinary state,” adds Taylor, “If we’re aware of ourselves and behave in an impeccable way then we’re in the best place.” Attention to both detail and the bigger picture, following through on all assurances including paperwork, accepting how challenging processes unfold and their use to the inner healer, are all tips from the psychedelic ethicist who helped sculpt the MAPS Code of Ethics and more. “You don’t have to be perfect, because no-one is, but you should be compatible and do whatever comes to mind to protect the space. Wish the client truly well on their journey, through your actions as well as words.” Generating and expressing goodwill is apparently one of the three pillars of trust , alongside competency and reliability – and that goes back to Aristotle. If you need to pull out someone more on-brand, there’s always Huxley: “Good is a product of the ethical and spiritual artistry of individuals; it cannot be mass-produced.” Related reading Architecture is the trippiest job The Eagle and the Condor5a:T5ee,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph of the Week “There are many other ways of acheiving altered states,” says Kylea Taylor, Grof Foundation therapist and psychedelic ethics expert. Here’s trip playlist maetsro, Guided Imagery and Music therapy inventor Helen Bonny’s handy guide to them: From: The Use of Music in Psychedelic (LSD) Psychotherapy, Helen L. Bonny, Walter N. Pahnke, Journal of Music Therapy, Volume 9, Issue 2, Summer 1972 My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: Slaine: The Horned God by Pat Mills and Simon Bisley Got it from America for £25 plus slow P&P here’s some 2011 editions for £300+ Celtic myth reinterpreted by one of UK comics’ greatest minds, illustrated by future fanboy favourite Simon Bisley. This has just been re-released. But don’t be fooled, the new one’s got crappy matt pages. The 2011 original dust jacket edition and the 2014 second printing have gloss pages. It’s chock-full of inspiration for young fellows growing up, like this one direct from the lips of the Goddess herself: “The Horned God is nor afraid of death, of losing control… he sees the ridiculousness of taking the wheel of life seriously. The humour of death is his.” A bit much to take in aged 16 during the late 80s but it put a generation on the right track. Next issue: Core module two Psychedelic Therapies continues with ethics training on the edge of reality5b:Tb60,My unofficial Vital Study Zine # 9 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space NO. 63 by Norbert Schoerner from Gallery 46 This week Vital students heard from hero lawyer Courtney Barnes of Barnes Caplan LLC, state policy advisor for Decriminalize Nature, and associate attorney at Denver cannabis specialists Vicente Sederberg LCC. When Brits now based in the USA visit me in London nowadays, they’ll chuckle “I forgot weed is still illegal here!” as if that’s quaint and amusing. So I spent most of this week checking out UK legislation and musing on that. Muse upon this week’s insights including the opening of the world’s first psychedelic ‘amazement park’ in my home town of Bristol, where Ben Sessa’s Awakn just secured UK government funding and a green light for Celia Morgan’s addiction treatment using ketamine in North America. Psychedelic attorney Courtney Barnes. I only use lawyers who wear Pucci, personally I did pick up: in the US and undoubtedly here in the UK, you can get busted for supply for leading a ceremony even if you’re not the actual supplier, although ‘duty of care’ legally obliges professionals to point enquiring patients towards the safest route to psychedelic experience they know of. Any kind of illegal activity whatsoever is unthinkable for any professional in a US state where psychedelics remain illegal. “I’m a member of my local emergency services and can’t possibly get involved in anything beyond the law,” said one Vital student. Screening potential voyagers, ideally via a spoken reference is highly recommended. From a licensed US facilitator: “My clients come from two close and respected community sources. Many have experience from their youth and would like to undertake a significant, intentional experience for the right, realistic reasons, in the forest, with someone trained to look after them.” Interestingly, when this Vital student evaluated possible experients he covered all the bases recommended for both the legal treatment he was licensed in his state of residence to provide, and the canny, no-stone-unturned, word-of-mouth recommendations for underground practitioners. Featured More mushroom tea, vicar? Savvy brits are sussed to self-care and change is happening. But the vulnerable are being left behind. Hymn of the Big Wheel My hometown has a psychedelic amusement park and high street ketamine clinics. How did that happen? UK leads new inner space race But there aren’t nearly enough healers to dish out the medicine from its “world leading” scientists. The New Bethlehem. Not like the Old Bedlam Woods near ‘Bedlam’ asylum will house the NHS’ first purpose-built psychedelic ward. Once and future Albion Is this actually it? Builded here amongst the mills? Next issue: Kylea Taylor charts a path through the ethical warpstorm of psychedelic therapy5c:Te72,Approach Savvy brits in the space are sussed to self-care. But the vulnerable are left behind Contemporary graffiti in east London Here’s a ray of optimism, before I start even attempting to unravel the respective messes that are Britain’s drug laws and mental health provision. A judge in Cumbria, northern England just said she hoped ’the law will catch up with science’ when pardoning an accused man for growing his own magic mushrooms to benefit his mental health. Britain has the highest depression rate among children in Europe, along with one-third of the continent’s drug overdose deaths and its worst alcohol problem. Mental health problems cost the British economy £118 billion annually. The situation is apparently more dismal than we even think . Lockdown saw a 47% increase in young people seeking help and I need hardly quote again my recent article elsewhere detailing the stigma that still exists in the workplace around stress and burnout. It’s characteristic of the British legislature to turn a benign blind eye to self-medication while dragging its feet on psilocybin prescriptions. Former prime minister (PM) Boris Johnson and his pantomime villain advisor Dominic Cummings supposedly had psychedelic therapy as a political cause celébre partly because Brexit meant chances to the law could be actioned quicker. Now they’re out of the game, things are even worse in the corridors of power. Unlikely Men in Tights of this particular pantomime are the Conservative Drug Policy Reform Group UK home secretary Priti Patel says she’ll ban ‘middle class’ cannabis smokers from nightclubs and take away their passports to derision from even Daily Mail readers . Front runner for new PM Liz Truss has turned Judas on her 420-friendly past. The centre left is no better with its leader Keir Starmer, a former head of public prosecutions, saying he’s “seen too much damage” in his former role. Dude, the unremittingly grim extraction economy lifestyle is the problem across all classes especially the estate-condemned non-working class. Not the weed itself. While kids opting for dank oblivion above all else is a problem, it is hardly caused by marijuana alone and previous alternatives like booze and heroin are frankly worse. My entirely subjective opinion from the ground is that the approach reeks of not upsetting near-senile, control-freak baby-boomers. Unlikely Men in Tights of this particular pantomime are the Conservative Drug Policy Reform Group that are actually part of the UK’s centre-right Conservative [Tory] Party. Its campaign to legalise cannabis and psychedelic therapies has the blessing of former prime minister John Major, ex-Tory leader William Hague, current Northamptonshire police, fire and crime commissioner Stephen Mold, plus ex-MI5 (it’s like Homeland Security) chiefs Lord Evans and Baroness Eliza Manningham-Butler. Over half of voters from even right-wing parties believe in the legalisation of psychedelic therapy, according to a YouGov poll quoted by broadcaster and former advisor to PM Theresa May Tom Swarbrick . Thought leaders like the redoubtable Zoe Cormier of good eggs Guerrilla Science are also in the media front lines doing the mushroom god’s work. Meanwhile the country’s largest NHS trust are opening a new dedicated facility in the grounds of the former ‘Bedlam’ hospital alongside Compass Pathways which you can read about elsewhere in this issue . The naturally British reaction is to quietly do what it seems the justice system, NHS and general public are already doing. Which is plough on regardless leaving the government apparatus and armchair windbags to their own ineffectual posturing.5d:T1fff,Therapy My home town of Bristol boasts a psychedelic ‘amazement’ park and therapy clinics. How did that happen? Jeremy Deller, ‘Wiltshire Before Christ’ photo by David Sims for Aires Arise “Bristol is the San Francisco of Britain” declares Dr Ben Sessa of my home town where Awakn Life Sciences is based. How? Not only with Britain’s first psychedelic clinic – accessible without a referral – but also the world’s first immersive psychedelic ‘amazement park’. Bristol is making up ground, perhaps, for its heritage in tobacco and slavery. The clinic is the first branch of Awakn Life Sciences , opening also in London (opposite Euston Station) fronted by Psychedelic Renaissance author Dr Ben Sessa and addiction treatment icon Dr Celia Morgan. As of earlier in 2022, AWAKN’s main investor is the UK government. Wake the Tiger is the name of the day trip destination. A lockdown brainstorm from festival innovators Boomtown, it is actually named after Peter Levine’s trauma tome Waking the Tiger . Creative director Lak Mitchell’s wife is a shadow-specialising psychotherapist, and suggested it. Wake the Tiger’s backdrop narrative offers a journey to an alternative dimension where all the unwanted clutter of consumer culture ends up; the sequence begins with a luxury living development where the only thing really living is a tree in the lobby. Wake the Tiger in Bristol, the world’s first psychedelic ‘amazement park’ Stu Tallis who sorted the branding at Taxi Studio, told the website Business Leader , “It pushes the boundaries of imagination and represents the truly unique and fantastical experience that fuses ancient wisdom and creativity… it needed to be scalable to accommodate the possibility of replicating the experience across the country and becoming a multiverse. It is a category-defining moment representing a sea change in how immersive art experiences are created.” Opening in late July 2022, Wake the Tiger received £1.85 million in crowdfunding. Reviews are gushing, from those microdosing or otherwise. Kids get in free. They don’t know they’re born. Dropping a Purple Ohm to watch Bristol City lose at home to Swindon (by four goals) was all that we had in my day. “Wake the Tiger is a unique and fantastical experience that fuses ancient wisdom and creativity” Bang in the middle of the upmarket Clifton district is AWAKN’s Bristol ketamine clinic. The Times dispatched its most simultaneously verbose and glib columnist, David ‘Fatty’ Arranovitch to check it out . Unlike more intrepid reporters (hem-hem), he did not try it out. Although he does end the piece by pointing out the potential for psychedelic treatment of obesity, after beginning by complaining about the walk up Constitution Hill that I and my chums made to school most mornings, while daydreaming of the next time we could obliterate the pain of a rigid, parentified upbringing in service to the slave morality. Sorry, flashbacked and regressed a bit there. Professors David Nutt and Celia Morgan, who form the Awakn dream team with Dr Ben Sessa Anyway, another AWAKN is planned for Manchester later this year while Oslo in Norway was the first AWAKN to open. AWAKN’s chief advisor is Professor David Nutt, a national treasure since he was sacked as the government’s drug policy advisor for saying LSD (and ecstasy, and cannabis) was less harmful an intoxicathan alcohol on daytime TV. Dr Sessa, who Vital students will hear from in Week 13, I believe is the most forthright and refreshing middle-aged man in the psychedelic space internationally right now. AWAKN’s special sauce though is arguably provided by Celia Morgan. The fabulously clever redhead is also Exeter Uni’s head of psychopharmacology, and inspires fervent adoration from her Phd students. The National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) are funding two-thirds of the costs for her alcohol use disorder treatment programme with the very British name of ‘Project Kestrel’, although KARE was used instead once the bureaucrats got their hands on it. Professor Morgan appeared in Business Insider’s list of the most important women in psychedelics earlier this year. Devising the first official cure for alcoholism, though would assure her a place in medical history. There are no flies on Morgan, who has discussed the dangers of chronic recreational ketamine use on BBC Woman’s Hour – “I’ve met teenagers who have to wear catheters,” is her conversation-stopper. Professor Morgan has even adapted psychedelic therapy for both the addiction and ketamine aspects of Project K: “We designed it to go with the ketamine effects,” she told The Guardian newspaper in its own report, “We wanted something evidence based, a therapy that has been shown to help people avoid alcoholic relapse. But also something that would work with what we know about the brain in the ketamine state.” Morgan embarked on Project Kestrel as a final year student at once-mighty University College London (which is about to open its own psychedelic mega-department headed up by the highly plausible Rosalind McAlpine). She pulled together strands of her friend’s experiences of recreational ketamine use with her family’s of addiction, and laid the foundations of an approach that could wrest thousands of sufferers and those close them from the living hell of alcoholism. Plus cut the £5.5 billion the UK loses to the condition every year. Morgan’s test subjects stayed clean 87% of the time after six months , compared to a measly 2% beforehand. Many have pointed out that it could be the therapy itself that’s making the difference, provided at very high quality in the trials for free, just like in the depression trials. (That this is not your regular psychoanalytic therapy is a matter for another time, although props to Arranovitch for quoting a patient as saying “it was more about the boozing than my mother”). Only 8% of addicts ever seek treatment as it is, due to stigma or the way they’re not guzzling miniature brandies on the commute like a TV stereotype. It’s this ‘not quite in crisis, yet’ group who suffer too and are arguably more motivated to seek treatment should it be available without a CV-staining, divorce-prompting diagnosis. Dr Sessa too stresses that childhood trauma isn’t usually born of what we know as ‘abuse’ – corporal and cruel punishments – and instead is a feature of many material-focussed western upbringings. “We wanted evidence based therapy shown to help people avoid alcoholic relapse, plus work with the ketamine state” Dr Sessa is a soundbite slinger, which I as a journalist appreciate. “Bristol is the San Francisco of Britain” is one of his best shots, and he’s done a lot to catalyse that. ‘There is only one good use for a small town. You hate it and you know you’ll have to leave,’ sings Lou Reed on the opening track of Songs for Drella , his and John Cage’s 1990 concept album dedicated to Andy Warhol. I left my own home town of Bristol for university in 1992, aged 18. Since, it has realised its media image as a Mecca of skateboarding, street art and… intentional drug taking (plus plasticine animation, as local artist Banksy rarely misses the opportunity to point out). And in the past six months, Bristol has even superseded modern-era triumphs such as the aforementioned world’s favourite artist’s Dismaland exhibition, in the admittedly dismal Weston Super-Mare, a former holiday resort notorious for its quicksand beaches. But I remember my home town for its repression, casual violence, and nihilistic ennui, caused mostly by traumas and addictions that while ‘low-level’, eat away at the soul and body nonetheless. And it’s partly because they will never be seen as a source of necessary concern; we change only when we have to. If the West of England is coming unstuck from those behaviours, then I shall never slag it off again. I might even go to Wake the Tiger. Related reading Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill W’s LSD use inspired 12-Step and cured his depression Psychedelic therapy is an art first and a science second5e:T13f4,Space But there are not nearly enough healers to dish out the (desperately required) medicine. Why? This is actually from new ‘psychedelic amazement park’ Wake the Tiger in Bristol “Mental health workforces are shrinking at a time the demand for mental health services is increasing,” says the news blog for Europe’s first psychedelic research centre Clerkenwell Health, just down the road from me in London. Dr Derek Tracy, medical director at West London NHS Trust, told Sky News earlier this month that he has never seen such a high demand for access to mental health treatment. “It’s as busy as I’ve ever seen in my career. Numbers are up across all age groups and in all types of presentations, in London and nationally.” March 2021 figures claimed a quarter of adults reported ‘clinically significant psychological distress’ that month , up from just over a fifth before the C-19 pandemic. So one in four of us are suffering from… ‘clinically significant psychological distress’. Suicides are up again since 2018. In May 2022 the number of under-18s referred to emergency mental health services went up 37% on the previous year, a record high. Depression and anxiety are the number one reason for taking time off work. “There are not enough therapists to deliver these treatments” This while corks pop on bottles of Nyetimber as the UK is declared “world leading” in the innovative treatment research field. Back on Clerkenwell Health’s blog, “Developing new drugs has attracted significant commercial interest. But the delivery aspects of these treatments are yet to receive the same attention. There are more than 150 psychedelic drug developers in the market. Patients’ demand for psychedelics is also increasing.” Clerkenwell Health’s stark conclusion? “There are not enough therapists to deliver these treatments.” I’d respond: that’s because there are too many barriers to becoming qualified. This week Vital students heard from lawyer Courtney Barnes, who detailled Oregon’s facilitator license training requirement that are not dissimilar to its own syllabus. Clerkenwell Health’s own psychedelic therapy program requires accredited health professional (AHP) status for entry. Which puts it beyond my means, for example. That requires a degree in occupational therapy at least, or better still being a clinical psychologist, which involves a decade or so of grind that I’ve been told by those who know for sure is not worth me trying in my mid-40s. Psychotherapist training is three to six years according to the UK Council for Psychotherapy . I wonder how long the list would really be of qualified individuals, who have experience with psychedelics, and have long harboured a compulsion towards a very different psychological approach? How do they feel about the commute to central London? Who otherwise has the time or the money to retrain? I’ve worked with graduates in £80K of debt who want to be superstar fashion stylists, not spend their days under fluorescent light talking to long-term alcoholics about their visuals. Experts from Stanislav Grof to Dr Rick Strassman implore upon prospects how demanding psychedelic therapy can be. This is before we talk about the 28% of AHPs who quit due to burnout , the 16% who want to leave the sector entirely, the 43% actively looking for a new job, or the third who cite low pay and overwork as the main issues. “Developing new drugs has attracted significant commercial interest. But the delivery aspects of these treatments are yet to receive the same attention” 100,000 vacancies in the NHS lie unfilled while expensive and life-consuming qualifications that were once unnecessary – my mother worked as a midwife, and the ward sister at Dick Whittington Hospital A&E here in London with no university education – stand right in the way of anyone compelled to join the sector. Anecdotally: a friend who’s worked at a high level in nursing for 12 years, including on the COVID-19 ward, has to undertake an MSc (in… nursing) before she can go up a pay grade and become a senior nurse. Granted there may be one or two useful things she picks up during it, but compared to 12 years on the job will it be worth the time and the debt? Especially given the demand for senior nurses? Full psychopomp status via the Clerkenwell Health program lasts only three months and is free, incidentally. To accredited healthcare professionals. Embers of hope burn, certainly with outspoken, heritage foundations like Beckley emerging into the C-suite conversation and the fast-tracking of the MAPS PTSD programme . Though no wonder unofficial psychedelic mental health services thrive. While these may cater well to the slightly-unhealthy normals, who Grof to David Nutt say can benefit immediately from psychedelic experience alone, they cannot expect to hold back the tide of trauma and addiction. And as almost everyone connected to the issues –except the gatekeepers – agrees, the current set-up certainly can’t either. Related reading Can you hold your own? Cosmic Midwifery5f:T91e,Medical The UK NHS, Compass Pathways and King’s College promise a ‘beacon for mental health treatment’ in South London South London architecture collective Resolve Compass Pathways are partnering with the UK’s National Health Service and King’s College London – at the once-notorious ‘Bedlam’ asylum in London. Plants to treat over 650 NHS patients with Compass’ Comp360 psilocybin-based treatment plan include a new facility amongst 200-acre woodland. Mired in scandal back in the 1700s for making a tourist attraction of inmates St Mary Bethlehem Hospital has actually moved site at least once and is now in un-psychedelic Croydon. It’s run by South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust (SLaM), the largest mental health trust in the UK National Health Service (NHS). Research will be conducted by the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology at Neuroscience (IoPPN) at King’s, which was founded in the 12th Century and has partnered with Compass since 2007. It’s the first of its kind for the UK state healthcare system that’s under siege from the demographic time bomb and mental health epidemic. “It will be a centre of excellence for new therapies that don’t always involve psychedelic drugs but also the key therapy that goes along with it” says Professor Allan Young from IoPPN. “The focus is on people who use mental health services day to day, developing effective new medicine for patients with depression, anxiety, addiction and other mental health issues,” says NHS exec David Bradley . No news yet on who will be designing this New Esalen but South London’s Resolve must be high on the shortlist. London-based Compass has come out swinging in 2022, taking on autism alongside the NHS with its, er PSILAUT program and fighting off off a challenge to Comp360 by Freedom to Operate, whose founding legal eagle Carey Turnbull said, “We are confident that the PTAB’s extremely narrow interpretation of Compass’s patent claims will provide generic manufacturers of psilocybin with wide latitude to produce and commercialise psilocybin without risk of violating the Compass patents.” So everybody’s happy… for now. Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment60:T183e,Integration I s t hi s act ua lly it ? Builded her e? Among st th e mi ll s ? Jeremy Deller’s 2022 cover for The New Statesman magazine’s ‘A Dream of Britain’ issue guest edited by actor Michael Sheen “It’s a hopeful, optimistic interpretation… blended, dynamic, fantastical,” says British artist Jeremy Deller of his vivid cartographic A Dream of Britain pictured above. The vibrant painting of the United Kingdom closed the British Museum’s smash Stonehenge show of spring/summer 2022. Deller is colourblind so sees it differently to you and I. This he says reflects a national identity that is forever intersubjective, and in flux. In issue one of the Vital Student Zine I pulled out Albion Dreaming , Andy Roberts’ history of psychedelic Britain : “From the Sixties onwards sections of the counter culture used the term Albion to refer to their vision of a land, society and individual consciousness based on the insights offered by LSD,” writes Roberts of the romantic goal gathering pace in pop culture. All the big gun historians from Pliny the Elder, through Marinus of Tyre, to Geoffrey of Monmouth cite Albion as the original name for these sceptred (in a non-dual way) isles. The legend is kick-ass (arse). First, the original King of Syria, or a King of somewhere in Greece maybe, had 43 (or possibly 33) illegitimate daughters who all got married on the same day, killed their husbands on the same night, and fled right here. Where there were no men. So they had it off with incubi – the male equivalent of a saucy ‘succubus’ sex demon – and produced a race of giants. The sisters named the place after their alpha female, Alba. William Blake ’s ‘The Dance of Albion’ In the sequel, beleaguered Brutus of Troy is fleeing his eponymous horse fiasco when the freaking goddess Diana appears and tells him to voyage beyond Gaul to “raise a second Troy”. There were only 24 giants left by then including the fearsome Gogmagog, who got chucked off the white cliffs of Dover. That’s my GoT-style swashbuckling version with apols to Geoffrey of Monmouth and the crew. “To the counter culture Albion refers to a land, society and individual consciousness based on the insights offered by LSD” Any sort of ‘New Albion’ got off to an auspicious start after Sir Francis Drake used it as the first name for California upon landing in 1579. Since then it’s had further ups-and-downs. Esoteric saint, the poet and painter, William Blake named Albion ‘the primeval titan’ from which his four aspects of man sprang, and pictured it as a giant wearing nothing but a broad grin against a rural Utopian background featuring splashes of pastel colour… apropos of nothing. Blake invokes Albion when in need of a term to idealise Britain: his Vision of the Daughters of Albion is a feminist protest poem influenced by his friend, and collaborator, Mary Wolstencraft Shelle. And he cries “does this thing happen on Albion’s shores?” in Little Boy Lost, an ode against child cruelty. The English cricket, rugby, and Commonwealth Games athletic teams all use Blake’s proto-socialist hymn Jerusalem instead of the official national anthem. Pete Doherty’s Margate HQ The Albion Rooms Shadow side ‘Perfidious Albion’ was a term invented by French bishops to bemoan England’s Dark Ages clerical set-up. Later, French Revolutionaries assumed support from the country that toppled its monarchy and installed a puppet aristocracy a century previous. When it didn’t come, the former miserables ran with the term propagandising an, erm, supposed track record of diplomatic betrayal, even bringing up the whole Joan of Arc thing again which everyone knows they were in on. ‘Two Roman Legionaries Discovering The God-King Albion Turned Into Stone’ by Mark Sheeky Two Roman Legionaries Discovering The God-King Albion Turned Into Stone is a 2008 painting by Mark Sheeky. He says, “It’s inspired by Brief Encounter, a film from 1949 that showed a Britain which no longer exists, a country and time so alien to the Britain of 2008 that it is difficult to believe that a place like that ever existed. I wanted to represent the end of that old Britain, so I chose the end of another era as the setting. Two foreigners, Roman legionaries, walk towards the edge of Britain in the grey rain. Through mud, to the grassy limit of the country, the top of the great white cliffs. As they reach the edge they discover a giant stone man standing in the sea, the once king Albion, now dead and grey and cracked. A statue preserved like a memory. A reminder of an ancient time now gone forever.” Or has it? Under re-story-ation rules fiction can be considered as powerful as the imagined past, right? And in terms of syncronicitous relevance, the phrase Albion cropping up like this must be some sort of sign? “I’m not an activist, I’m a fantasist” Here in C21 the Dionysus figure of our second Atlantis, musician Pete Doherty evokes Albion so strenuously that he’s opened a hotel in Margate (it’s like Portland crossed with Oakland, by the sea) called The Albion Rooms . “Reebok classics, and canons at dawn; terrible warlords, good warlords, and an English song” goes Doherty’s band Babyshambles’ gentle rabble-rouser Down in Albion . “I’m not an activist, I’m a fantasist. Inverted snobbery is just as dangerous as snobbery itself, you know – that pride in having nothing,” he says. By Erwin Wurm at Albion Fields sculpture park Over at the other end of the quantum funnel from this grass-roots desire for a new national identity lies Albion Fields sculpture park, open till end of October 2022. It’s an outdoor exhibition free to anyone but to which nonetheless ‘the glitterati are flocking’ according to Tatler magazine. The woodland’s owner (in fact it was planted at his birth) is Michael Hue-Williams, an art dealer who first showed Ai Weiwei in the UK and represents generation-defining photographer Nick Knight . He says, ‘Walking through these beautiful grounds during lockdown, I realised I have a unique opportunity to share the experience.’ Perhaps reciprocity can exist at all levels. Once and future.61:T5ef,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph or Table of the Week Self treatment with psychedelics: From: Self-treatment of psychosis and complex post-traumatic stress disorder with LSD and DMT —A retrospective case study by Mika Turkia published in Psychiatry Research Case Reports Vol 1 Issue 2 (2022) My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: Storm of Steel by Ernst Junger Another score from the Brick Lane bookstore, £6.50 “No other writer has thus opened my eyes,” wrote Albert Hoffman of Junger’s sublime nature writing in LSD: My Problem Child . Although the psychedelic inventor who corresponded with Junger after WW2, was keen to point out that he was less into Junger’s ‘earlier books’ about ‘war and a new type of human being.’ Junger was Germany’s greatest military hero of WW1. Throughout his career he consistently refused to apologise for embracing conflict when necessary, perhaps in contrast to his proto-hippy views that influnced the 60s counter-culture. He did accept that the warrior was powerless against the march of tech. “In war you learn your lessons, and they stay learned, but the tuition fees are high” is just one of the gems from this terrifying and exhilarating account of trench warfare that’s often uncomfortably, but necessarily, voyueristic. Next issue: Core module two Psychedelic Therapies continues with ethics training on the edge of reality62:T11f9,My unofficial Vital Study Zine #8 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space ‘Liquidated Chanel’ by Zevs, works avaialble from Magda Danysz gallery The final lecture in Vital’s first core module of five, Psychedelic Therapies: Historical and Current Approaches focussed on the future. And not only that of psychedelic use, medical or otherwise. Dr Bennet A Zelner is developing and applying ‘biomimetic’ solutions inspired by the natural world, to on-the-ground business practice. Right now he’s associate professor of business and public policy at the Robert H. Smith School of Business at the University of Maryland. His research there includes a radical study on the impact of psychedelic insights on organisational leaders, with the petri dish being a local copper mine. “Around 2013 I felt disconnected from work, marriage and life in general,” he explains of his psychedelic journey, “I put the blame on myself; after all, I had external measures of success supposed to fulfil me. I was reintroduced to psychedelics, this time in an intentional setting. The insight was that my profession was completely dysfunctional, which wasn’t supposed to happen.” After examining this with his psychedelic circle, “Gradually I realised I could use what I had learned to possibly affect change. I started working with a focus on psychedelic assisted mental health treatment.” Dr Zelner’s experience of the vastly successful Frome Model of healthcare in Somerset, UK provided the evidence for his economic solutions that integrate business, community, wellness and health. “Pharma has leveraged the social and financial disconnection which contributes to mental distress” He now advises a plethora of businesses and orgs, including the MIND European Foundation for Psychedelic Science and Europe’s Synthesis, where its first leadership retreats with Zelner and Sampson are underway. Dr Zelner is teaching along with fellow psychedelic academic, lawyer Rachelle Sampson . Plus, in the spirit of altruism he helps out with his local Brooklyn Psychedelic Society. Plus, he’s behind the investment fund trying to turn on business, Transformative Capital . “Today, about 40% of Americans report that they feel isolated and don’t have meaningful relationships,” says Dr Zelner. The pharmaceutical industry has leveraged this hyper-individualism, the social and financial disconnection, which itself is contributing to the mental distress they’re supposed to be trying to address the first place.” And which it is holding at bay at very best, with big pharma profits tripling and patient numbers rising steadily. “Frightening as it may be, the chaotic state of our systems holds the potential for true change” This happens across the business sector. ’Extractive economics’ where resources and revenue are taken from a community and applied elsewhere, contribute to the sense of disconnection impacting healthcare, says Dr Zelner. “The CEO to worker pay ratio rose from 24 times to over two thousand, between 1980 and 2017. That’s one example; another is chain stores taking over local businesses, Main Street to Wall Street.” Re-connecting finance and communities will benefit healthcare in and of itself, while bottom-up innovations in healthcare provide fertile ground for communities and local businesses to grow organically. “The current chaotic state of our current systems, as frightening as it may be, I think, also does hold the potential for true change,” says Dr Zelner. Here he is talking to London’s Psychedelic Society plus you can see more of Dr Zelner over in the New Psychonaut YouTube lecture hub . Featured Healing of the Nation New strategies inspired by nature are already being adopted by business leaders. Re-Story-Ation Ancient principles for living encourage a wondrous view of the world. Is this the ‘re-enchantment’ with life we need? Complex cosmologies, explained Syrupy new age spirituality cannot hope to illustrate our lived experience. What can? Village Green Preservation Society A quiet psychedelic revolution in health care has already happened down West Country way. Infinite Debt to the Biosphere “We are in infinite debt to the biosphere, that we cannot possibly hope to repay.” But let’s give it a go. Kool-Aid Corner #8 Your regular round-up of trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life. Next issue: As the first psychedelic park and Awakn’s clinics open in Bristol we ask: is Albion here? Plus guest lecturer Courtney Barnes on US law63:T133a,Approach Become a tree, mushroom, bee or flower with pollination models and mycelial economics By Tabita Rezaire in Black Fantastic at the Southbank Heyward Gallery, London till September 18 Psychedelics have been totally colonised, of course. But mushrooms even have the answer for that. Dr Zelner didn’t just quit the rat race. He found a way to disable the money trap. ‘The Pollination Approach’ that he originally outlined in a landmark article for MAPS is a new community based healthcare structure, inspired by the vastly successful Frome Model that you can read about in this issue’s Medical section. He further acknowledges that if community, business, economics and health are interconnected, then it’d only truly work if systems other than healthcare change too. Especially if we’re to avoid a psychedystopia like that set out in illustrated story We Will Call it Pala , which my Reichian body work coach would call ‘evocative’. Wielding his understanding of biomimetics, Dr Zelner says “Fungi control the allocation of resources to plants, and they don’t set it all up so one can get much bigger than the others,” he says, “The social shift is from a disconnected pattern to a connected pattern, where people in social organisations are linked in multiple ways – which is also nature’s pattern, the mycelial network, the root networks if you will, of mushrooms. Resources are circulated through the entire system, keeping money local and creating economic multipliers.” It’s the kind of thing both Banksy and my dad would agree on. Dr Zelner’s Transformative Capital Institute is allocating funds to those kind of projects. “None of us needs to take on the responsibility to change the world. Incremental, emergent change is how life’s process works” Regenerative economics, the ‘community and wellbeing first’ business strategy has also been completely colonised. You can do an MSc in it. Zenner says, “I’m not anti-capitalist, but in regenerative economics shareholders can’t be prioritised above all. I saw the phrase crop up in a traditional venture capital firm report, saying they like my pollination approach and it could help double their profits. Obviously there’s a conflict there.” He continues, “Wellness has been colonised,” of course, “any change we can make through the policy process is incremental at best.” Ranting at your Twitter feed about the latest moral-political infraction is finally over. “None of us needs to take on the responsibility to change the world, says Dr Zelner, “Incremental, emergent change is how life’s process works. Positive action at a micro level is regenerative. Individual behaviours quickly become a pattern shift. You are a pollinator.” And yes, psychedelics could still be the healing of the nation as ‘The first lady of LSD history’ Dr Erika Dyck stated in this rallying Charcuna piece . “Psychedelics help people question their beliefs, and we are socially constructing this reality. They shift people from disconnection to connection. It’s an embodied experience of the regenerative pattern.” We don’t need to get everyone on board immediately. “Tipping points happen only at 15-20% of a network,” advises Dr Zelner. Switching to ‘steward ownership’ is one way socially-minded firms new and old can limit their exposure to extracting finance. The format allows a business to legally put purpose over shareholder returns, capping revenue-based financing returns after eight years. Late in 2021 Europe’s Synthesis Institute raised its Series A round of $7.25 million investment funding under a stewardship model becoming the first psychedelic company to do so. Back around the neighbourhood, Dr Zelner’s local Brooklyn Psychedelic Society are drawing up a Frome-style health co-op to great excitement. I grew up near Frome, and my parents remain active in community life: amateur dramatics, parish council, village hall management committee, ‘walking football’ for the boomers. The internecine clashes within village life have inspired endless hours of situation comedy over the years, plus recently a lockdown viral sensation . Research from Imperial College, no less, says psilocybin treatment for depression increased nature awareness and softened any authoritarian politics amongst the test group. I ask Dr Zelner if psychedelics can even heal neighbourly squabbles. “I don’t have as many funny stories as I’ll probably have this time next year,” he grins, “The Brooklyn project is very new and run by a guy called Colin Pugh. They’re still at the phase where they’re figuring out if to be a traditional co-op, versus a non-profit co-op, how to engage the existing membership of their traditional psychedelic society…” Maybe a dose of non-dual thinking will still be required before life’s committee meetings. Till then, we can but dream.64:T13be,Therapy Ancient principles for living encourage a wondrous view of the world. Is this the ‘re-enchantment’ with life we need? From Modern Alchemy, photographs by Viviane Sassen, available from by JBE Books Rainforests gave the West spectacular medicines for the body. Could their way of life provide healing for the mind too? Half of all pharmacological medicines are derived from plants, including recent innovations, and 25% come from global rainforest. Curare, the muscle relaxant Amazonian tribes used to stun animals, prompted a revolution in anaesthetics and modern medicine. Quinine was the first cure for malaria. Vincristine and Vinblastine from Madagascar, used the treat cancers, have vastly extended the chance of surviving childhood leukemia. Now, thousands flock to ayahuasca retreats to balm their souls. But passionate field researchers both young and old claim the lifestyle and ideology around the medicine is essential to redemption. “Our profound alienation is a consequence of turning relationships into things” Washington-based Joseph Mays , wields a master’s in ethnobotany from the University of Kent – a likely hotbed of radical thought – after observing responses to globalisation from the Yanesha in central Peru. He’s published a smart medicinal plant guide for the Jama-Coaque Ecological Reserve and works as the program director of Chacruna’s arse-kicking Indigenous Reciprocity Initiative (IRI). From Modern Alchemy, photographs by Viviane Sassen, available from by JBE Books Mays cracked his bonus Vital lecture off by quoting Karl Marx like a boss. “Marx spoke about the ‘metabolic rift’, man’s alienation from nature,” says the scholar and activist, “We are now in ‘The Anthropocene Epoch’.” That’s the conceptual geological era we’re living in now. The official one’s the Holocene. The Anthropocene represents a time man begins to have geological impact upon the Earth, roughly marked by the detonation of the first atomic bomb. “We should think of our bodies with alchemy in mind” Ernst Junger warily observed the march of technology throughout the 20th century. He wrote that it was best explained by the senseless, arbitrary nature of the First World War. Not only in the power new weapons had to slaughter hundreds in a moment, but the absence of any serious evaluation of why it was happening. Junger considered the endemic, fatalistic nihilism he witnessed in the trenches, and in the commuter era that followed it, “a new, terrible practice” and spoke of “the loneliness of man in a new, unexplored world, whose steely law will be felt as meaningless.” Vincent Blok, in his acclaimed Ernst Junger’s Philosophy of Technology writes that our enlightenment values of ‘“Reason and humanity, of morality and individual freedom” count for nothing now they are wedged within the indefatigable gears of… The Anthropocene . “The resources of our inner and outer worlds are inseparable” Mays quotes feted Brazilian anthropologist, Cambridge lecturer and writer of Cannibal Physics Eduardo Viveiros de Castro, who writes that our profound alienation is a consequence of “turning relationships into things” and “perceiving life as a collection of detached objects.” The animistic view though is “inherently subjectifying” in contrast to the objectified modern era. It also stands alongside our own subjective spiritual beliefs, working as a system to integrate Earth and consciousness. “We are now in The Anthropocene Epoch” Breaking the dichotomies – mind-body, mankind-Earth, civilisation-environment – can also free us from our alienation. Our energy spent on tweaking existing problems could go into designing alternatives. “Maybe we should think of our bodies with alchemy in mind, and imagine many other compositions or assemblages,” says The Life of Plants writer Emanuele Coccia in his introduction to Modern Alchemy, a new series of photographs by Viviane Sassen published by JBE Books , photos from which you see here. From Modern Alchemy, photographs by Viviane Sassen, available from JBE Books Learning on the job develops a deeper relationship with the non-human elements of vocation and personal growth. Individual responsibility and local ‘bottom up’ development puts ownership for our immediate experience in our own hands, away from the distraction of political infighting. Communities are marginalised in a similar manner to the environment. Energy is better spent providing a container for them to address their “own needs, and their own priorities in a self-directed manner from the ground up” as a forest would. Or like Somerset UK’s Frome Model of Compassionate Primary Care that has slashed hospital admissions by 40% over a decade, which you can read about in this issue’s Medical section . “Biological and cultural diversity are inextricably linked,” says Mays, “And the culture of plants and communities are inter-dependent. The resources of our inner and outer worlds are inseparable.”65:T10af,Space Syrupy new age spirituality cannot hope to illustrate our lived experience. What can? From Modern Alchemy published by JBE Books ‘Psychedelic rhetoric’ is a term I’ve been searching for. I can’t claim to have coined the phrase or for it to be sacred ceremonial insight. Instead it is the words of academic hotshot Reanne Crane , a linguistics expert at the ever-more radical University of Kent. She spoke at The University of Exeter’s Philosophy of Psychedelics Conference 2022. On the programme, one of the keywords listed for her talk was ‘synthesisers’. “Everything’s ineffable. If I had to describe the experience of sitting on this chair I’d have trouble” Music’s only one method we use to communicate notions language – especially this one – can’t. Words certainly don’t do justice to the psychedelic experience, as we are all painfully aware. In her talk Scrap the Book: Polymodes, Metaphors, and the Psychedelic Skyline at The University of Exeter’s Philosophy of Psychedelics Conference 2022 Crane asked, what damage might that be causing and what can we do to make it better? Crane, also a bedroom producer and songwriter, used ‘cleaning the filter’ as an example of witless psychediatribe , employing contemporary sound design to demonstrate her point. Making a rockstar late entrance, Crane strode down the auditorium steps and took straight to the stage declaring, “Everything’s ‘ineffable’. If I had to describe the experience of sitting on this chair I’d have trouble.” Lumbering late Anglo-Saxon lingo requires myth and story to weave in philosophy and perception. “Indigenous people don’t need to say ‘ineffable’ because they have complex cosmologies,” Crane delivered in her plain-speaking Yorkshire accent. “Losing our grip on absolute truth might be what we all actually need right now,” she declared to a hall of hardcore truth seekers while hovering cross-legged above a conference chair. Awareness of other realities is the key to coming to terms with our own, say the modern-day explorers returning from in-depth field research. “If we remove the mushroom from our taboos it loses meaning. And efficacy” Back at Vital where we’re drilling down on meta-awareness with a no-holds barred lecture on the realities of Amazonian shaman-hood. “Poetry can include nuance and euphemisms avoiding difficult subjects,” says Nicholas Spiers, a courageous anthropologist and film maker who directed space smash hit The Peyote Files and is Chacruna’s research coordinator. Nonetheless “Difficult questions are not answered by the new age” says Spiers to rapturous applause from this website. The West has been ‘addicted’ to positivist spirituality for decades. Our crystal-based codswallop is a sanitisation of the post-industrial Western mysticism inspired by Helena ‘Madam’ Blavatsky in the 1800s. Can we cope with the lessons of the plants? Because this particular medicine might be difficult to swallow. “Objects with particular material value are considered profane,” expands Spiers, “neither does anybody ‘own’ the trees, or the forests.” To put it another way: Chihones, morally ambivalent spirits of nature, can infect you with illness for not respecting natural customs. Does that somehow strike more of a chord? “It’s OK to use the mushroom to find a missing rooster” It gets worse: “If we remove the mushroom from our taboos,” as we do seem set on doing to some extent, “it loses meaning… and therefore efficacy,” warns Spiers. Human ingenuity and good old acceptance can see us though. During his time with the Maztecha, Spiers was taken by one way the gentlemen of the village compete in their craft. “They use permaculture farming styles to grow organic coffee using natural predators to kill pests. The ferocity of the wasps’ nest on your farm is highly valued.” It’s not all “cosmic diplomacy” with the Chihones and working alongside wasps amongst the indigenous though. Spiers points out there are other advantages besides a resolution with nature: “It is seen as appropriate to use the mushroom to do practical things. Like, find a missing rooster.” Related reading Can you hold your own? Cosmic Midwifery66:Td09,Medical A radical healthcare program centred on human interaction emerges in Somerset Frome stained glass artist Jo Eddleston Here in Albion a new psychedelic model of healthcare is saving the National Health Service millions. “What we should be doing is spreading wellbeing with an integrative approach, not just treating diseases,” says Dr Zelner, “Wellbeing is an inherently holistic concept. You can only create it with an integrative approach.” Glorious Somerset is the supposed site of King Arthur’s Camelot and the 4,500 year-old stone circles in Stanton Drew where Currunos and The Wild Hunt roam (it is also reasonably close to glastonbury and Stonehenge, yes). It’s also a hotbed of middle-class flight from post-COVID London. Property prices are going through the thatched roof. Born within this liminal fuzzbox is The Frome Model of Enhanced Primary Care . In place for over a decade it’s saved the NHS £6 for every £1 spent on it. This gently radical approach to public health provision is focussed on community interaction, especially including the most vulnerable. Over its 12 years in progress, the sleepy West Country town of Frome’s accident and emergency admissions have reduced by 16% while the local average has risen 30%. “It proves community improves wellbeing” ‘Primary care’ is health work intended to prevent disease before it requires any treating. Face-to-face contact has proven to be the most effective way to do this. The model mixes primary care innovations with organic community development programs. Dr Zelner explains, “Around fifteen years ago the health workers in Frome observed a lot of patients coming in were suffering from loneliness. They decided to treat loneliness as a medical condition: training up health connectors who’d look out for people who seemed lonely, and community connectors who connected them with community organisations.” ‘Why buy when you can borrow?’ is A Library of Things’ slogan Further innovations followed in what Compassionate Communities director Dr Julian Abel , former vice president of Public Health Palliative Care International, calls ‘Integrated well being networks that enhance naturally occurring ones.’ “They set up ‘talking cafes’ where you could chat to strangers freely,” expands Dr Zelner, “in-person visits for hospital dischargees, and hubs inside the surgeries. It became known as ‘Compassionate Frome’. There’s been enough time for empirical evidence and all admissions have declined by 30-40% relative to neighbouring areas. It proves community improves wellbeing.” Indeed, 81% of patients felt their wellbeing increase and 94% said they found it easier to mange their health. The programme is being rolled out across the UK. Echoing Stanislav Grof’s view of the Freudian mental health model, Abel writes, “‘Survival of the fittest’ is not a phrase that accurately reflects our evolution. Instead, ‘survival of the kindest’ describes how animals, especially humans, have evolved to be social creatures. We are dependent on each other, and how we treat the people around us has a profound effect on us all’.” Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment67:T177d,In te gr at io n W e c an not h ope to fully re pay our debt to nature. But we c an give it a go From Irving Penn – Burning Off the Page at Pace gallery Los Angeles till Sept 3 Feeling that familiar Western guilt? Motivated even to actually do something? But what? Never fear. You can pay money, like normal, and it’s (kind of) fine . Plus you can also change your behaviour. I offer genuine compassion for how tough this can be. Especially when it involves not only stepping outside of your comfort zone, but abandoning the concept of comfort zones althogether. Anthropologist and documentary film maker Nicholas Spiers is The Chacruna Institute of Psychedelic Plant Medicines’ lead researcher. He’s written an Annotated Bibliography of Key Texts on the Indigenous and Historical Uses of Psilocybin for them, and he co-directed this year’s plant medicine TV smash The Peyote Files with Chacruna founder Bia Labate. He’s also made films about Salvia divinorum and Racist Psychedelic Myths . Nick, who spent several years embedded in the Sierra Maztecha, is, like many animistic converts, not one for any sort of BS whatsoever. “Our own society seeks ‘catharsis’ which technically means a ‘balm’ or ‘quick fix’,” he explains, “we look at ‘unwellness’ rather than ‘wellness’ leading to a a culture of fear. True reciprocity would be a titrated experience, expanding our capacity for both the comfortable and the uncomfortable.” Sure. Can you give us an example, Nick? “Well, what you’re doing here on Vital is trying to address mental health. Right now, for example, bipolar diagnoses struggle to find work, and marginalised communities may display what appears as ‘psychosis’,” he replies, “The foundation of Western psychology is at fault, but nothing is done to help them or address it.” The West currently looks to epistemology – drilling down to a single truth – to inform its purpose. Cultural beliefs, which cannot be measured empirically, don’t count towards epistemological truth. “Plant medicine is inseparable from people” Ontology though considers the nature of existence instead, where consistencies can still be found – including in matters less easily pinned-down, like the regularity of change or the source of creativity. Joseph Mays, program director of Chacruna’s Indigenous Reciprocity Initiative of the Americas , puts our dysfunctional dependence on epistemology into an economic frame. “The indigenous communities are suffering from the same extractive system that takes from our own environment and wellbeing. It externalises as many costs as possible,” this includes exploiting tribes and its local workers he says. So “reciprocity can happen in any relationships, human or non-human, employer to employee. Or with ones friends, family, and neighbours: “the conservation of nature requires the conservation of communities,” adds Mays. Ernst Junger floated many of these themes in 1951’s The Forest Passage , which is gradually becoming his most referred to treatise. Therein Junger holds court in spectacular fashion. “Before our eyes, fields that sustained owners and tenants for thirty generations are carved up in a manner that leaves everyone hungry,” he wrote in one of the first broadsides at extractive materialism, “Forests that supplied wood for millennia are laid level; and from one day to the next the goose that laid the golden eggs is slaughtered and its flesh used to cook a broth, that is shared with all but satisfies none.” Junger’s life coaching centred on his concept of ‘the forest rebel’. I pretend to be one while I’m doing my forest bathing. Junger’s archetype focuses on retaining a sense of freedom, without plunging into the abyss of ‘fatalism’ by deciding you’d better just be more of a bastard than everyone else seems to be. Instead, you can hold on to your own morals and independence. In Icelandic myth, Junger explains, “A forest passage followed a banishment; through this action a man declared his will to self-affirmation from his own resources. This was considered honourable, and it still is today, despite all the platitudes.” Others may roll their eyes, but really they cannot help but be impressed by your autonomy. The forest rebel has not given up hope, either. “Freedom is prefigured in myth and in religions, and it always returns; so, too, the giants and the titans always manifest with the same apparent superiority,” quoth Junger with characteristic confidence, “The free man brings them down; and he need not always be a prince or a Hercules. A stone from a shepherd’s sling, a flag raised by a virgin, and a crossbow have already proven sufficient.” Which leads us to handing over your disposable income. Chacruna’s Indigenous Reciprocity Initiative aims to ‘decolonise philanthropy’. Existing programs demand certain concessions from the recipients of their charity dollar; the IRI is strictly ‘no strings attached’ and works directly with 20 community groups distributing donations equally. Reforestation, peyote conservation, traditional storytelling documentation, and a Shipibo Plant Medicine Garden that shares its seeds with other communities are only a few examples. It’s raised over $100,000 in tis first year with only 7.5% of that going on overheads. “Plant medicine is inseparable from people,” says Mays, “studying the perspective hinted at by visionary plants can give us a guide forwards.” ‘Be the change you want to see’ then, like the cushions at Ikea implore you to do. That trite quote is attributed to Mahatma Ghandi when he actually said was more profound: “As a man changes his own nature, so does the attitude of the world change towards him. This is the divine mystery supreme. A wonderful thing it is, and the source of our happiness. We need not wait to see what others do.” Related reading Vital Study Zine Week One: The Ground Zero of LSD Research Kool-Aid Corner #368:T4a3,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph of the Week Impact of traffic noise on heart disease: From: Impact of road traffic noise on annoyance and preventable mortality in European cities: A health impact assessment by Sasha Khomenko et al, published in Environment International Volume 162, April 2022 My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: Cosmic Serpent by Jeremy Narby. From World of Books for £4.79 I understand why Cosmic Serpent is overlooked in favour of writings from more local experts like Eduardo de Luna. But it does at least come from the PoV of an intrigued, enthusiastic westerner. Plus it contains not only descriptions of the ceremonial process, but the animistic lifestyle that informs it . Narby was only in his mid-20s when he travelled to Peru, and soon after first published the book in France in 1995. It was 1998 by the time it made it to the UK. That’s still 25 years ago. Kudos to Narby’s instinct for picking up on the vibe so long ago. Next issue: Core module two Psychedelic Therapies begins with Courtney Barnes on the legal situation69:T1516,My unofficial Vital Study Zine #6 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space John Giorno ‘We Gave a Party for the Gods’ in the gardens at Chateau de Versailles Who would inject test subjects with large doses of intravenous DMT four times in a row thereby opening a new paradigm in psychedelic research? And who, on an otherwise genteel psychedelic training course, would casually riff on orgasms, prophets and brainwashed assassins? Before announcing that it’s probably the placebo effect anyway? Who turns up at self-declared ‘21st Century Mystery School’ The Tyringham Initiative as sole representative of the USA, and whacks a bible on the overhead projector before calmly explaining that entities are angels? Despite being an ordained Zen buddhist lay priest. And, besides all this drugs stuff, once found a new way to grow embryonic avian dorsal root ganglion neurons, suspended in a semi-solid agar matrix? As one does. Who, in this psychedelic renaissance of ours, is totally styling it in double denim while sharing police medical reports on the fallout from satanic ayahuasca rituals on Facebook? Dr Rick ‘The Strass’ Strassman does all these things and much more. Like a strong ecstasy pill he sneaks up, and you don’t realise how out there you were till 24 hours later. Displaying affection and disdain for the contemporary space in equal measure, like the sensitive and driven do, this dark horse of psychedelia rattled through a sharp snapshot of the science, peppered with his own astute asides. And yes, he spoke about the sex, death and God stuff. And the pineal gland, and the entities. “I knew I had to be really well trained to do work like this” Dr Strassman played with a straight bat in his startling breakthrough book The Spirit Molecule , covering his pioneering DMT tests that catalysed the psychedelic renaissance and become one of the most compelling areas of experimental science. In his opening to this ‘Contemporary Research’ lecture he urged Vital students to also take a scientific approach when rising through the ranks. Dr Rick Strassman will put the cat amongst the pigeons at your ceremony “Stanford in the 70s was pretty cutting-edge. It was a very interesting time, intellectually,” he reminisces, “I was 20 years old in July 1972, and I was watching the sun come down on acid, and decided I wanted to study psychedelics. I wrote a manifesto, got a bit hyper manic, and 19 out of 21 medical schools rejected me straight out. Of the others, one refused talk about it in the interview. The other heard me out, and rejected me anyway. So I knew I had to be really well trained to do this.” Look normal, and they will suspect nothing. Dr Strassman’s rigour paid off and his research on DMT at the University of New Mexico between 1990 and 1995, which he successfully applied for state funding. Like a tripedal DMT vision shaped as a giant rotating bejewelled milking stool, he stands astride neuroscience, theology – in fact he’s about to reveal his ‘ theoneurology ’ research – and the imaginative, creative chaos of the trickster archetype. He is currently Clinical Associate Professor of Psychiatry at the University of New Mexico and on the advisory board of Eduardo de la Luna’s Wasiwaka centre in Brazil. “Stanford in the 70s was pretty cutting-edge” His latest, The Psychedelic Handbook released in 2022 offers up his own thoughts on grassroots healing. DMT: The Spirit Molecule is a core psychonaut text and here’s that Joe Rogan movie . Aficionados recommend DMT and the Soul of Prophecy: A New Science of Spiritual Revelation in the Hebrew Bible and Inner Paths To Outer Space: Journeys to Alien Worlds through Psychedelics and Other Spiritual Technologies of which Dr David Luke says “This book raises many fundamental questions about the nature of reality that have barely been asked in the scientific community, let alone answered, and I strongly urge all researchers of consciousness to read it.” “This book raises many fundamental questions about the nature of reality that have barely been asked in the scientific community, let alone answered, and I strongly urge all researchers of consciousness to read it.” In the company of fellow travellers he is liberal with his opinions that were always well-informed, and tempered where required. Often these ran contrary to narrative – as the wisdom of the serious players often does. Listen to him talk about God and DMT along with a bunch more on the New Psychonaut ‘lecture channel’ . Featured Boldly going where no heads have gone before Strassman and Andrew Gallimore’s seemingly lunatic plans for a ‘DMaTrix’ have become reality. If you can still call it that. This may hurt a little… Spare no sacred cows in your own work, is Dr Rick Strassman’s top tip for psychotherapists. Holy vape pens, Metatron! Arguing what DMT entities are is moot says Dr Strassman. Besides, they’re angels. The lollipop of optimism The placebo effect is valid, “scientific, and real”. It could be behind the psychedelic experience. Peak sexual experience DMT could be key to women’s earth-shattering cervical ‘full body’ orgasms. Kool-Aid Corner #7 Your regular round-up of trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life. Next issue: Dr Bennet Zenner, the mycelial businessman6a:T2288,Approach Intravenous infusion (IV) application allows for extended DMT sessions dubbed ‘DMTx’ lasting hours at a time By Colin Prahl from the exhibition Limit Sequence at The Chambers Project gallery till 16 September 2022. homepage image ‘ Geodesia’ also by Prahl is available as a print from the artists’ webstore . DMTx is an extended DMT trip applied by intravenous drip… in the ‘DMTx machine’ at Imperial College London. “It’s crazy that ppl aren’t studying endogenous DMT more than they are,” says the man who brought ‘the spirit molecule’ to Western attention, pointing out that Dr Jon Dean of DMT Quest cannot get further funding for his revelatory 2019 discovery that DMT is produced in large quantities by the human body. “Nature is gushing with DMT” according to Dennis McKenna. At least plant medicine got decriminalised in Dr Dean’s Michigan neighbourhood. “How is DMT made?” Strassman prompts, “What’s its synthesis? What turns it on or off? Why should the brain when faced with this simple, ubiquitous molecule start constructing these alien realities? And what purpose does it have?” Dr Strassman’s got plenty of ideas to get the ball rolling. He first put forward the notion of a DMaTrix in a 2016 paper published alongside Andrew Gallimore , a Japan-based British neuroscientist who could lay claim to being the most ambitious psychonaut in the global space. “The DMT experience could be ‘titrated’ both in terms of duration and intensity, adjusting these levels to accommodate the specific needs of individuals” The two pointed out in rigorous scientific detail that DMT was ideally placed to be administered by IV drip, hospital bed-style. ‘There are potential clinical applications of a continuous IV infusion of DMT,’ they wrote, ‘Compared to the substantially longer effects of other psychedelic substances, DMT offers more discrete and therefore more easily manageable experiences. In conjunction with continuous target‐controlled infusions, the DMT experience could be “titrated” both in terms of duration and intensity, adjusting these levels to accommodate the specific needs of different individuals and indications.’ Colorado based Mindfulness Medicine picked up on this and began its DMTx awareness-raising project already preparing 21st Century to explore DMT hyperspace for extended periods. Gallimore’s enthusiastic lectures suggested they would y’know, get used to it after a while, find their feet and achieve a clearer, productive learning experience. The intensity can be dialled up or down, and explorers in dire straits can be pulled out of DMTx at the flick of a switch. “I asked Rick how long he’d like to spend there,” says DMTx’s Daniel McQueen, a psychotherapist and psychedelic retreat organiser, and ‘Oh, a couple of days’ was the reply.” On the practicalities of commuting to hyperspace Dr Strassman commented “Well, astronauts wear diapers” during his Vital lecture. No prizes for guessing where the DMaTrix is up and running right now. Imperial College London, backed by the UK’s Small Pharma company are on the verge of publishing the results of their experiment SPL028 Prolonged DMT Series: An injectable formulation of deuterated DMT designed to deliver a more prolonged psychedelic experience . At July’s Breaking Convention conference I chatted to a gentleman who’d been in the DMaTrix (already shortened to ‘The DMTX Machine’ in UK space argot), the day before; a young neuroscientist. He seemed pretty chilled, to be fair. “I won’t ask you what it was like,” I said, flexing my fearless reporting skills. “Hm,” came the reply, in acknowledgment. He showed me photos, and there he was wired up to the machine in a technicolour Frankenstein’s laboratory transported into the secular era, with MSB doors plus health ‘n’ safety notices. And a dude playing the lute in the corner. While it was one of those strikingly unfamiliar scenes that tickled my ontology, there was undeniably something exciting, creative, proactive and downright courageous about it too. This was bolstered by the presence of Robin Carhart-Harris himself, who’s taken personal charge of SPL028 (which is patented ). Still, by the time you actually read this there could be a hole torn in the fabric of reality where Imperial’s South Kensington campus used to be. “The important thing is not what the entities are, but what can we learn to better ourselves and society?” Imperial’s model is considered ‘scientific’ in comparison to the DMTX org’s emphasis on spiritual preparation. The college’s secret weapon Dr Chris Timmerman though is out there detailing a combined model of approach and researching DMT’s similarity to a ‘waking dream’ state featuring the requisite rapid drop in alpha waves and rise in delta plus gamma waves, plus: “reduced modularity, increased integration and functional plasticity. These findings were complemented by psychological studies showing that the DMT state is one of immersive visual imagery, intense somatic experiences and partial disconnection from the environment, which we found shared significant overlap with near- death experiences. DMT administration also resulted in positive mental health outcomes in healthy volunteers providing evidence for the first time that DMT may provide a useful alternative to currently investigated psychedelic treatments.” The space’s first documented encounter with stand-alone DMT came in 1961 when William Burroughs wrote to Timothy Leary urging him to have some apomorphine to hand if he gave it a go. Because Burroughs had thought he was fine with DMT until one of his companions turned into – what else? – a bejewelled jaguar. (Burroughs was already a veteran of the Amazon, having written about yagé over a decade previously. Neuroscientist Andrew Lees credits Burroughs , a failed doctor who became a writer, with inspiring him to sample yagé that in turn “broke down certain rigid structures that were blocking innovations” in Lees’ leading Parkinson’s disease research). Leary write later that DMT was “the nuclear bomb of the psychedelic family. A sub-cellular cloud-ride into a world of ordered, moving beauty which defies external metaphor. There’s memory of structure, because space is converted into flowing process.” His crew’s reports were varied, and indeed DMT still gets a mixed reception today despite a John Hopkins compilation report maintaining 80% of users surveyed reported positive entity encounters . “The kids round here don’t need psychedelic guides. They’ve got YouTube and DMT vapes” Lady Amanda Fielding described it as “a little harsh” with English understatement at the Psych Summit. But her Berkley Psytech concluded in its ayahuasca research that long-term use is beneficial. Might as well try microdosing it then. “The kids round here don’t need psychedelic guides. They’ve got YouTube and DMT vapes,” said a friend of mine based in a large regional UK city when I told him about Vital. And indeed medical reports published in July 2022 shows how a diagnosed schizophrenic claimed to have healed himself with DMT and other psychedelics. “During his final trip, he even encountered an “entity” in the form of a geometric shape called an icosahedron “with a consciousness”. Every thought that the teenager shared with the icosahedron was mirrored back to him as if it would have answers to all possible questions. Taking his treatment a step further, the patient then began smoking low doses of DMT on a daily basis for an extended period of time. Doing so brought him into contact with yet more entities and produced an antidepressant effect. Eventually, he came to realise that “he wanted [to] belong to the society and the world, to live and enjoy life. He described that ‘life had begun to feel like a life”.’ Well, The University of California says microdosing DMT works for rats. Out there in the self-healing underground though, the “question everything” rule Dr Strassman swears by is alive. “Vaping DMT is spiritual masturbation” writes one discontent (a Chicken Licken or plant medicine snob? You decide). Carl Jung warned, “Beware of unearned wisdom” and with my apprentice ‘guide’ hat on I would remind everyone to actually live the lessons learned from the Icosahedrons or whatever they might really be above. “The important thing is not what they are, but what can we learn to better ourselves and society?” says Dr Strassman. And we cannot do that if we spend the whole time wired into a machine at Imperial College. Related reading Are ‘corporadelics’ doing enough for set, setting… and society? Saving lost souls for three million years. And now with MDMA6b:T17bf,Therapy Constant reflection and tireless self-work are essential to handle the rigours of psychedelic therapy Paul Smith , ‘Awaken’ via here . “Doubt is core to the psychedelic movement,” says Dr Strassman, “We question authority, we question belief.” The top-flight ego dissolver leaves no current controversy unexamined in his Vital lecture on contemporary research, evoking the hard truths of psychedelic experience. The fearless researcher starts by probing the supposed mental health revolution. “I don’t think these miraculous cures are going stick,” he warns, “The figures are good, but there’s an open question abut regularity. With ketamine it looks like you’re having to come in every week. Psilocybin looks like every month or so. People ‘come down’ and revert to the old patterns.” He’s most keen to impart the value of self-examination and ‘shadow work’; on behalf of the therapists themselves. “Consider your own prejudices. Take what you believe to be ‘right’ and and be very careful not to project it,” he warns. “There’s been a suicide in testing. One subject was so disappointed he didn’t have one of these ‘life-changing mystical experiences’.” Dr Strassman is an ordained key buddhist priest and a student of Hebrew mysticism who’s developing a way to communicate with entities using conversational models inspired by the prophets of the Old Testament. But he’s not sold on the ‘mystical experience’ allegedly key to healing. “I think if we left it secular we’d be better off,” he says, “the scientific plane can coexist. There’s been a suicide in testing because one subject was so disappointed he didn’t have one of these ‘life-changing mystical experiences’. Part of the setting should be not to have it as a goal.” This actually echoes Stan Grof, who in LSD Psychotherapy refers to Einstein’s ‘cosmic consciousness’ that can be considered universal, practical and even scientific. Therapists should allow ‘a symbolic framework that is emerging spontaneously from the subject’s collective unconscious, and is the most appropriate form for their spiritual experience.’ “If this is a simulation, there’s still cause and effect. You do things, think things, they have repercussions” Dr Strassman’s standpoint extends to arguments from the religious use movement. “There’s a movement to you relabel these compounds divine, or specifically ‘generating God from within’. That assumes a lot: first of all, that there is a spiritual level of existence, specifically God, and that’s within us, you know, which is questionable. That a drug can generate divinity, or a real religious experience, I don’t think is an established fact.” Humans are capable of transcendence without a particular faith, says Strassman: “My colleague Daniel Freidman used to talk about the ‘portentous’ moments – the feeling that what you’re seeing is the most significant thing you’ve ever undergone. That can be truly meaningful even without religious belief.” Even once the more fantastical effects of the treatment have worn off, “it will still strengthen aspects like ‘vocational efficacy’, one’s sense of self.” Strassman prefers ‘unitive experience’ to the ‘spiritual’ term, and reminds “there are plenty of ways to achieve a mystical experience without drugs, in particular traditions for example.” [EG tantra, or alchemy]. “Doubt is core to the psychedelic movement. We question authority, we question belief” Plus he advises sensitivity with any spiritual props in the treatment room. A multi-faith approach might work for the irreligious but some communities can be actively triggered by some psychedelic tropes: “a lot of the official music is Wagner, which the Nazis played to jews arriving at the concentration camps. Imagine you’re a jew presenting with generational trauma and hearing that as you’re coming up. Or lots of christians believe Buddhism is idolatry and paganism. If a christian opens their eyes and the first thing they see is a buddha… it may be cool, it may not be.” Challenging experiences is a term he’s equally wary of: “Challenging ‘reactions’ is possibly less onerous.” With Strassman it all comes down to results. Asked where he stands on Anil Seth’s simulation theory , he replies “If this is a simulation, there’s still cause and effect. You do things, think things, they have repercussions. I don’t think we need to spend a lot of time figuring that one out.” Tremendously more important, he says is that “We make ourselves better people and the world a better place. If psychedelics can contribute to that, more power to them.” The Strass is so promethean that he debunks his own landmark hypotheses. Like the one about DMT originating from the pineal gland AKA ‘third eye’ in mystic circles. “I don’t think it’s as important as it was when I put it out,” he harrumphs, “I write a wild-eyed but scientific article about the pineal gland in 1991. The group in Ann Arbor picked up on that 12 years later, and produced the study in the living rodent pineal gland. Now a 2019 report thinks the 2013 data was the result of the probe going through the brain into the pineal snagged brain tissue, not pineal tissue… What’s much more interesting is the brain makes DMT – in very high quantities.” How will the stark nature of psychedelic science play out within our comically dysfunctional human condition? Turning to tragedy, ‘ Kill the physician and the fee bestow upon thy foul disease’ says the Earl of Kent to King Lear in act one of Shakespeare’s masterwork. Lear has disowned his loving but frankly-spoken daughter, after her honest efforts to protect him from hubris; the complacent monarch is suffering from a ‘disease of the ego’ according to Shakespeare buffs. Related reading Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill W’s LSD use inspired 12-Step and cured his depression Psychedelic therapy is an art first and a science second6c:T1b3f,Space Arguing where DMT entities come from is moot says Dr Strassman. Besides, they’re angels Magnus Gjoen, ‘I Saw the Sky Come Down to Meet You’ available here . It’s how and what we learn from DM entities that counts. Not their origin, says Dr Strassman. “The most important thing is how we use our words. Can we ask the right questions? Can we ask the right answers? And remember them?” says the Spirit Molecule author. Dr Strassman might be wary of bringing established religions into psychedelic therapy. But he’s certainly not against using them to aid discovery. “The established model is ‘neurotheology’ which states the brain is at the centre of human experience. Things can get it off that: drugs, fasting sleep deprivation, that trigger brain reflex changes. But these are described after the fact as ‘spiritual’ and given terms like ‘openness’, ‘ecstasy’, ‘out of body experience.’ Modern science, which is informed by the biological, competitive model put forward by Sigmund Freud and Richard Dawkins, explains this as “We’re evolutionarily configured to be perceptive, compassionate, empathic and sociable to help us survive.” This explanation might be tight, but fails to include the grander narrative that DMT is especially at pains to impress upon us is ‘real’, or ‘noetic’ to the scientific language. “During the 1990s tests, I learned that I wouldn’t get the same debriefs out of subjects unless I took their DMT experiences to be real,” says Strassman on his YouTube . And can we just explain away art, love, friendship, purpose and so many other wonderful things, as stuff we do to get laid? “I expected Zen shunyata without form, feeling, consciousness, perception or volition… empty. It turned out DMT was everything but” Theoneurology , outlined in Strassman’s book DMT and the Soul of Prophecy: A New Science of Spiritual Revelation in the Hebrew Bible flips the script, proposing the ‘divine’ whatever it might be, informs neurology. This could be said to suit the psychology of Carl Jung. At this point it’s worth noting that the two Vital lecturers who’ve cautioned the most against ‘transcendence porn’ and the quest for a ‘mystical experience’, Bill Richards and Strassman, are both deeply religious individuals. “Buddhism saved my life after I dropped out of medical school,” Strassman says, “I became a serious practitioner for two decades. I’m in its debt. It was the closest thing I had come across that strengthened the psychedelic experience, and also strengthened my belief there was some intimate relationship between psychedelic states and buddhist practice.” When he began his famous early 1990s DMT tests he expected the experiences to mirror buddhist teaching: “Both myself and the subjects expected something similar to Tensho, the Zen state of shinyata, “without form, feeling, consciousness, perception or volition… empty.” However, “It turned out that DMT was everything but that.” He continues: “The beings, the visions, the information… The personality was maintained, even strengthened. There was space and time, it was distorted but it still existed. This was not consistent with my data.” Strassman was subjected to an ego death of sorts: “I had to go back to the drawing board.” (Dr Strassman’s N, N-Dimethyltryptamine DMT is not to be confused with 5-MEO DMT of Sandoran desert toad fame, which is said to produce a ‘white out’ experience.) Other influences were at play in this ontological snafu. “I was being discouraged by the American buddhist organisation, for being too truth-orientated. I ended up studying judaism and being impressed by prophecy.” Ever the scientist, he uses ‘impressed’ to mean ‘could be useful’. “Armed with an expanded definition of prophecy from Maimonides, I began to compare the visions from the Old Testament and DMT” At the 2015 Tyringham Initiative gathering, Strassman stunned even the world-class psychedelic thinkers in attendance by delivering a bravura presentation on how Old Testament dialogue can be employed when chatting to DMT ‘entities’. (Read about it in the superlative DMT Dialogues book covering the whole conference, edited by Dr David Luke). Correspondence in hyperspace is notoriously difficult, and can include important elements like divulging the intentions of the entity in question, or decoding the information they relay. To clarify, “Prophecy doesn’t always mean foretelling like the canonical prophets do. It includes any spiritual experience: from the nameless soldier who has a dream predicting victory for Israel to Moses on mount Sinai.” The key text to study apparently is The Guide of the Perplexed , written by the Ottoman Emperor Saladin’s physician and astronomer Maimonides’ in 1190. “Maimonides borrowed Aristotle’s concept of ‘active intellect’ conflating information from the past, present and possible future,” says Strassman in this interview with a Hebrew mystic channel. According to Maimonides’ own introduction, “ The Guide of the Perplexed has a second object: it seeks to explain certain obscure figures which occur in the Prophets . Even well-informed persons are bewildered if they understand these passages in their literal signification. But they are entirely relieved of their perplexity when we explain, or merely suggest that the terms are figurative.” In recent podcast interviews Dr Strassman’s been keen to insist he’s presenting the notion as “an interested theologian” rather than a profile scientist. It doesn’t stop him bringing in medical anecdotes, like left-brain stroke victims seeing in ‘pixelated’ vision. Anyway, back to the Bible. “Armed with an expanded definition of prophecy from Maimonides, I began to compare the visions from the Old Testament and DMT. And, descriptively phenomenologically, the visions, the voices, the emotions, the effects on the body… were quite similar.” You may’ve figured that we’re getting into the ‘advanced class’ of psychedelic use here. So I’ll end with this passage from the book of Ezekiel, a favourite with contemporary churches, abridged by Strassman in his 2015 Tyringham Initiative presentation. “Ezekiel’s messages came from God and were intended to be given to the wider community. In chapter one, the heavens open, there’s a stormy wind, brilliant light, beings emerge from the fire. There are spheres, wheels. Ezekiel sees faces of beings: a man, a lion, an ox, an eagle. The beings run rapidly to-and-fro despite the immobility of their legs. Their backs and wings are full of eyes. Some beings fly through space. Thee is an expanse of blue, or a rainbow, above their heads. Ezekiel loses all strength, falls on his face. An angel stands him up, speaks to him, pulls him by the hair, and carries him through space.” Related reading Can you hold your own? Cosmic Midwifery6d:Te41,Medical The placebo effect “is scientific and real.” Psychedelics may just supercharge it Ann Veronica Janssens, Installation in situ at Panthéon , Paris until 30 Oct 2022 “Psychedelics were never found to be especially useful as brainwashing tools,” says Dr Strassman going deep as per usual, “you have to want to be healed… or to become an assassin.” He continues during his Vital lecture on contemporary research, “Sure, there’s neuroplasticity and neurogensis. But why’s the experience is so rich? That intensity is down to the activation of the placebo effect. Which is scientific, biological, endocrine and inflammatory.” Microdosing trials struggle to distinguish between placebo and psychedelic. But this only compounds the theory, he grins. The Strass went big on his theory that psychedelics replicate the placebo effect at ‘Psychedelic Neuroscience Symposium 19’ celebrating the University of Michigan’s breakthrough DMT research . “Effective placebos have to be rare, costly, foul-tasting or ideally all three” He pointed out how recent trials had highlighted psychedelics’ powers of suggestibility, and the importance of set and setting, plus how in his own 1990s DMT tests “We found that ultimately people’s experiences represented simply more of who they already where. The nihilist became more nihilistic, the software designer saw the origin of information bytes.” “Panaceas work through suggestibility. What if we’re talking about a ‘super placebo’ here? That’s why the integration process is so important. If you’re forming new neurons you want them in the right direction. How you occupy your mind after psychotherapy is important. If you watch violent hardcore porn you’re going to get a different result than meditating in the forest for a week.” Another fan of the placebo effect – and not just in drugs – is advertising guru and UK columnist Rory Sutherland. “Placebos really do work because that’s how our minds work” The Ogilvy agency wallah’s favourite anecdote is how in some other countries painkillers are marketed for specific ailments – back pain, headache – despite being identical products. Yet they work better, because of the placebo effect. “Yes, I know it’s bullshit,” he wrote , “But that’s the peculiar thing. We instinctively respond to things which are inefficient. Effective placebos have to be rare, costly, foul-tasting or ideally all three. In manners, in art, in friendship (in advertising, too) we are drawn to the unnecessary, the effortful or the extravagant. If rationality and efficiency were all that valuable in evolutionary terms, accountants would be really sexy.” Interior designer and thinker Charles Leon speaks about how placebos work even better if you tell the subject they are a placebo. “It suggests the ability of the brain and mind to heal is much more powerful than we give it credit for. Feelings can be inherited, whereas reasons have to be learnt. For instance, we are born with a fear of snakes. Experience may teach us why, but the reaction is first. Placebos really do work because that’s how our minds work.” Although I prefer to think of it as unleashing the true power of the human imagination, it would be the ultimate trickster gag if psychedelics simply empowered the placebo effect . The joke’s closing punchline being that there is one set of substances that are famously straightforward to tell from a placebo. Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment6e:Tf83,In te gr at io n D M T is pos sib ly res pon sible for the f e mal e full body orgasm Eternal Phoenix by Carolyn Mary Kleefeld There’s a new emphasis on returning to the womb. An intrepid Vital student asked Dr Strassman a very pertinent question, going forward: “I’m a sex therapist. Should I ever mix psychedelics with that?” Dr Strassman does have something of the ‘unlikely sex symbol’ about him. A volcano festers within, and I can imagine bookish, imaginative girls becoming rather intrigued by the quietly uncompromising genius. This image is compounded by The Strass’ involvement in the science of women’s cervical ‘full body’ orgasms. “I posted an interview about this on my Facebook page ,” he coyly replies to my fellow psychedelic student, “and it got a ton of likes compared to everything else,” (He probably means the Old Testament stuff). The splendid Double Blind magazine were first on it. The psychedelic lifestyle leader matched the sterling work of Olivia Bryant’s Self:Cervix project to spread awareness of earth-moving sex, with sex therapists who link that cervix to the vagus nerve. If the ‘full body’ orgasm activates the vagus nerve, the part of our nervous system responsible for the ‘rest and digest’ state, swinging from the chandeliers would bring significant health benefits. “You do hear reports of experiences with a sexual character during DMT states” The article quotes one of Bryant’s students: “Time both expanded and stood still. I understood everything and nothing. I was both God and unborn. The micro and the macro. The purest form of ecstasy and surrender I could ever hope to experience.” Writer Nicolle Hodges pointed out that in The Spirit Molecule Dr Strassman writes of DMT, “There is a powerful dynamic or tension between the two roles it may play—one spiritual and the other sexual.” Asked if the brain releases DMT during orgasm The Strass wouldn’t take the bait: “That’s not known,” he replies in the interview. ‘Is sexually-activated DMT production perhaps one of the major motivating factors in reproductive behaviour?’ comes the follow-up question. “It’s educated speculation,” he says. “We don’t know for sure one way or the other.” Undaunted, Hodges hit up Imperial’s Dr Chris Timmerman. “You do hear about reports of people having sensual experiences, which have a sexual character to them during DMT states,” he conceded, “Maybe [orgasms] have not been reported as much because sex has a taboo connotation to it, and the same can happen when sex is associated with DMT and psychedelics in general.” Britain’s cannabis journal Leafie ran with the ball. Neuroscience graduate Bethan Finnegan pointed out that women with major spinal injury can still have cervical orgasms and the clitoral orgasm deactivates the pre-frontal cortex leading to miniature ‘ego death’, with French lingo for orgasm being le petit mort, ‘little death’. Back in the Vital Q&A, Dr Strassman falls back to scientist mode. “You’d have to be methodical and incremental with your research! Study the DMT like properties of orgasm with psychedelic questionnaires, to make a cogent comparison. I think you’d find a relationship, strong correlation. Then you can look into how it occurs.” He has some trade secrets for anyone carrying out cutting-edge research in mainstream science… “Don’t worry about risk. Find some good mentors, keep your head on your shoulders, and do your research step by step in a Trojan Horse manner. That’s how I did mine.” Dr Timmerman in Double Blind adds some London-based understatement: “You would need to collect blood samples when people are having these experiences to detect DMT levels in their bodies when this is occurring. This might be tricky to do in a lab environment for obvious reasons. But not impossible.” Related reading Architecture is the trippiest job The Eagle and the Condor6f:T4ac,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph of the Week Positive effects of DMT on rats: From: Effects of N,N-Dimethyltryptamine on Rat Behaviours Relevant to Anxiety and Depression by Lindsay P. Cameron, Charlie J. Benson, Lee E. Dunlap, and David E. Olson published in ACS Chemical Neuroscience , April 2018 My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: illustrated Songs of Innocence and Experience by William Blake From the National Trust bookstall at Ashton Court, West Somerset for £2 I currently live near Bunhill Row Cemetery in east London, where the ‘noncomformists’ were buried just outside the old city gates. The plot includes resting palces for Wuthering Heights author Thomas Hardy, Pilgrim’s Progress writer John Bunyan, Robinson Crusoe’s Daniel Dafoe, and Blake. These poems contrasting the attitudes of the fool and the magus are a 12-Step favourite and often paired with the Bible’s Book of Job, that teaches life is more colourful when it includes hardship. Next issue: Bennet Zenner of Brooklyn Psychedelic Society takes the discussion into the here and now70:Tfff,My unofficial Vital Study Zine #6 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space From Internice Eating the Weather by Charlotte Wendy Law “The most exciting talk is the space right now is coming from philosophers,” said the 21st Century’s answer to David Attenborough, Merlin Sheldrake at June’s Breaking Convention conference in London. Psychedelic philosophy or ‘psy-phi’ aims to legitimise psychedelic insight, the culture of consciousness expansion and post-industrial ideology. The discipline applies academic rigour to tripped-out insight. It suggests how expanded consciousness can be applied in areas ranging from business to ecology – and revamp psychotherapy. Fittingly, psychedelic philosophy’s origin is the West Country of England . The academic centre being Exeter University, which announced the first bachelor’s degree in psychedelic studies at its 2022 Philosophy of Psychedelics conference. Other cosmopolitan hubs like Amsterdam and Berlin have got their eyes on our special cider. Exeter University’s much-anticipated compilation Philosophy and Psychedelics: Frameworks for Exceptional Experience , is published by Bloomsbury this summer. And its colourful co-editor Dr Peter Sjöstedt-Hughes materialised before Vital students this week, direct from Dartmoor. Dr Sjöstedt-Hughes, who edited Exeter’s tome, is a leading light in the movement. The reboot of Marvel superhero Karnak is modelled on him. Beyond providing much needed aesthetic airs – he is rarely photographed without a falcon on his arm – he provides psychedelic philosophy’s imaginative spark. “Humphry Osmond wrote to Huxley that he believed LSD’s greatest potential was its philosophical, social and religious implications,” he says, “I think the potential is still there.” Dr Sjöstedt-Hughes has documented the rich relationship between philosophy and psychedelic use, and spearheaded the rehabilitation of controversial philosophers including Henri Bergson, Ernst Junger and Nietzsche alongside rebranding cuddlier thinkers like Spinoza, George Bernard Shaw and Sir Humphry Davy. Dr Sjöstedt-Hughes of Exeter University’s acclaimed Philosophy of Psychedelics department, which announced the first bachelor’s degree in psychedelic studies at its 2022 Philosophy of Psychedelics conference. His books Noumenautics and Modes of Sentience are out now from Psychedelic Press. Philosophy and Psychedelics: Frameworks for Exceptional Experience is available to preorder now and out 18 July 2022. Find him at philosopher.eu and @PeterSjostedtH . You can watch Dr Sjöstedt-Hughes’ TED Talk on consciousness here plus a bunch more I put on this YouTube resource channel . These five items I pulled from the week’s research are themed along Vital’s natural element-themed structure. Air provides an overview of psychedelic use, Fire concerns therapeutic applications, Water covers ‘space holding’ – the art of keeping it together, Earth is where you’ll find medical matters, and E t h e r discusses integration, the process of bringing psychedelic power into regular life . Click straight through to your pet subject below. Featured Next Up, The Psychedelic Enlightenment “Social, ethical, legal and metaphysical issues can undergo a transformation akin to psychedelic therapy” says an inspiring new movement, with beards to match. Become one with your Moomin cup… Can psychedelic philosophy explain the healing powers of the cosmic whole? Who knows what lurks in the hearts of men and women? The shadow, obvs. And it has unfinished business… with you. More healthy, less normal The performance enhancing and problem-solving powers of psychedelics are growing in legitimacy and acceptance. Rising from the Ashes of God A new mythology is the psychedelic philosophers’ highest ambition. Kool-Aid Corner #6 Your regular round-up of trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life. Next issue: Dr Rick ‘Spirit Molecule’ Strassman spares no set or setting in his evaluation of the space right now71:T136d,Approach “Social, ethical, legal and metaphysical issues can undergo a transformation akin to psychedelic therapy” says an inspiring new movement with beards to match By Dana Awatani, works via Athr Art Psychedelics have a purpose beyond healing or good times according to the next generation of philosophers. Dr Chris Letheby is a laid-back (seemingly, you never know with these philosophers) Australian contemporary thinker. Say ‘epistemology’ in the accent. He likes jumpers and beards, and was the first to bring out a book titled The Philosophy of Psychedelics , published by Oxford University Press in 2021. During a Letheby lecture I sneak into from Berlin-based MIND , Dr Letheby academic definitions of ‘knowledge’ onto psychedelic insight with skill and precision, deploying bon mots from global philosophers and key points from contemporary research along the way. “Social, ethical, legal, and metaphysical issues can undergo psychedelic transformation akin to that achieved in therapy” Psychedelic philosophy’s nemesis is ‘the comforting delusion’; are we communing with the cosmos or just high and talking bollocks? Is psychedelic therapy, in Charles Grob’s phrase, an “existential medicine?” Or is it, as Michael Pollan wondered, ‘simply foisting a comforting delusion on the sick and dying”?’ Dr Letheby addresses in this article for MAPS . He’s calling for a ‘Psychedelic Enlightenment’ to follow our current ‘Psychedelic Renaissance’ period: “Social, ethical, legal, and metaphysical issues can undergo psychedelic transformation akin to that achieved in therapy,” he declares unpretentiously and convincingly. Philosophical debate though is not for the feint of heart, or head. Throw some ‘non-specific amplifiers’ into the mix and things get more real than real. Indeed as I write Vital week six lecturer Dr Sjöstedt-Hughes is fencing wits with Chris Letheby in the specialist press , about… admittedly I’ve not quite figured it out just yet from giving the article a scan. Although chances are it’s something to do with ‘the hard problem of consciousness’ (how life springs from matter, or otherwise). It usually is. Launching himself into this moshpit of contemplation is Aiden Lyon , another Australian with no beard this time but plenty of jumpers, out of Amsterdam University whose book… Psychedelic Experience is out soon, again from Oxford University Press. The formidable Lyon has a mind like a steel trap, unsurprisingly, plus the air of a frustrated Victorian man of reputation who’d prefer to be searching for King Solomon’s Mines, but the transpersonal will have to do instead. He opens a Mind lecture I attend by pointing out his ‘circular’ theory taking the ‘mind-manifesting’ definition of psychedelic experience has been approved by Imperial College’s Dr Robin Carhart-Harris. “Nature has intrinsic worth. Not just spiritual worth” Lyon, who’s already set up in consultancy, slices his way through the ‘Are psychedelic insights to be taken seriously?’ thing to point out that they can be very useful. There’s loads more in this issue’s Medical item. Lyon and Letheby are both terribly plausible chaps. But you may be forgiven thinking it’s all a bit monochrome geometric patterns, and not enough Tarot cards. Left, as opposed to right brain. Step forward Sjöstedt-Hughes, a former schoolteacher whose repertoire arguably channels the psychedelic. He does have a beard, but the similarities end there. “There’s seemingly something in us that needs expansion” He’s catalogued philosophy’s psychedelic associations , and spares no superlatives when addressing the power of 5-MEO DMT compared to earthly religious experience. Rarely (but not uniquely) among contemporary Western psychedelic renaissance types he tackles subjects like the ‘trickster’ archetype and its association with psychedelics, non-dualism and subjective morality, the existence and nature of ‘God’ – “looks like he’s out there but he doesn’t love you – nature has intrinsic worth, not just spiritual worth.” Sjöstedt-Hughes proposes the return of metaphysics to the political conversation and the high street: “like we’d see a therapist, we’d consult a philosophical-spiritual advisor… ‘the metaphysician will see you now’,” is just one flourish he delivers from behind his tinted aviators, “you could grab a leaflet featuring suggestions for alternative spiritual paths, like the simulation theory, or the receiver, on the way out.” But the psychedelic philosophers have ambitions way beyond the ivory towers of academia, or the medical industrial complex. Sjöstedt-Hughes in particular. “I hope psychedelics can be part of a grander idealism for civilisation. There ‘s seemingly something in us that needs expansion. Psychedelics might offer this. I do hope for it. and I do believe it’s actually going to happen.”72:Tcfc,Therapy Can psychedelic philosophy explain our innate sense of the cosmic whole? By Wolfgang Tillmans from Fragile, showing at Art Twenty OneEko Hotel and Centre for Contemporary Art, Yaba, Lagos, Nigeria till 10 July 2022 Psychedelic philosopher par eminence Dr Peter Sjöstedt-Hughes pictures a new breed of consciousness doctors to work alongside clinicians and therapists. “The metaphysician will see you now,” he jests about his notion of a service combining thinker, spiritual advisor and life coach. “ Spinoza , Alfred North Whitehead, Charles Darwin, and Albert Einstein all agreed nature was ‘God’,” says Dr Sjöstedt-Hughes, “and it doesn’t love you.” God is still all around. Like never before; ‘ pansychism ’ is the term for consciousness in all things. Like philosopher Jussi Jylkkä half-jests in this recent video interview with Sjöstedt-Hughes for The Philosopher, “So… I become one with my Moomin cup?” Before you marvel, “My ashtray is alive?” the consciousness operates at an atomic level, obvs. But, it’s still an ashtray. Keep up. “You should be doubting all the things you doubted before; you are uncertain about being certain” Psi-Phi , ‘philosophy of psychedelics’ presents an academic argument for the significance and benefit of psychedelic drugs. A sub-school of ‘psychedelic metaphysics’ explores belief structures like panpsychism. Legitimisation and education of reality-organising frameworks might aid mental health, like the personal ‘higher power’ 12-steppers are urged to take guidance from. “The hardest thing to see is what is in front of your eyes,” wrote Johann Goethe. And the psychedelic philosophy material is dense. My clumsy, infant sense of the subject is tempted to conclude that philosophy is to psychology what Lego Technic is to Duplo; it’s been debating the stuff YouTubers think they’ve just discovered for 500 years. Arguably, 5000. Psychedelic philosophy’s nemesis is the comforting delusion . “Is psychedelic therapy,” in Charles Grob’s phrase, an “existential medicine?” Or is it, as Michael Pollan wondered, “Simply foisting a comforting delusion on the sick and dying”?’ Chris Letheby addresses the ‘Aren’t you just taking acid?’ question in this article for MAPS . Letheby also cites Danish wellbeing guru, former special forces operator Nikolai Moltke-Left and his doctrine of “unbinding self” that echoes psychedelics, and how popular he is with the chattering classes (Moltke-Left is collaborating with Lego , sync). And anyway, Aiden Lyon reckons “You should be doubting all the things you doubted before; you are uncertain about being certain,” so that’s that. It’s all quite radical in places. Psychedelics have a habit of flipping over sacred cows. This wannabe trickster never tires of reminding the psi-phi lads that most of their favourite philosophers met with sticky ends at the hands of the mob: “Often I have the impression that I am writing on paper already browning in the licks of the flames,” mulled Ernst Junger, coiner of the term psychonaut . Who actually lived till 102 years of age. Related reading Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill W’s LSD use inspired 12-Step and cured his depression Psychedelic therapy is an art first and a science second73:T121b,Space The shadow, obvs. And it has unfinished business… with you By Rashed Al Shashai A significant event like taking a step forward in human consciousness has got to involve some kind of challenge, like a hero’s journey, right? “We will have to bear the tensions of the opposites. There are no easy ways forward. We will have to grapple with the unknown,” said the magnificent Maria Papaspyrou, editor of The Psychedelic Divine Feminine and founder of Brighton’s Institute of Psychedelic Therapy , at July 2022’s Breaking Convention conference. Paradigm shifts in society though begin at home, with our own ‘shadow work’. The Jungian negotiation process with complex urges that we feel from sheepish to psychotic about, is crossing over fast. The subculture is throwing out stardust like London’s Kemetic shadow witches High Priestxss . “The greatest sense of agency and healing is often found at the centre of the storm” And start-up bros are said to be seeking a fresh challenge that even sounds like the psychedelic version of an iron man triathlon. “Serenity, salvation and strength are not always found in the upward sense to the light,” commented a richly experienced trauma specialist in my Vital study group, Kelli Ann Dumas, “they spring from inward: deep, in the ripeness of the trauma. The darkest part of the night is just before dawn. The greatest sense of agency and healing is often found at the edge of the depth, at the centre of the storm.” Crucially insiders say shadow work is mandatory for psychedelic therapists and guides, to clear any lingering sense of grey areas from the set and setting for example, and to engage in a regular process of checking one’s motivations: “The more clearly you understand yourself and your emotions, the more you become a lover of what is,” wrote philosopher Baruch Spinoza. Dr Sjöstedt-Hughes’ psychedelic philosophy, explained in his lecture to Vital students, takes shadow work a step further. It challenges our status quo that inherently considers stability and comfort to be desirable; the ‘slave morality’ of Nietzsche. Over to another of Sjöstedt-Hughes’ worldly philosophers, Ernst Junger: “I am an anarch in space, a meta-historian in time. Hence I am committed to neither the political present nor tradition; I am blank and also open and potent in any direction. Dear old Dad, in contrast, still pours his wine into the same decaying old wineskins, he still believes in a constitution when nothing and no one constitutes anything.” Sjöstedt-Hughes has poured over Whitehead’s personal copy of The Will to Power written by Nietzsche in 1887-8. “There are no easy ways forward” He points out Whitehead has double-underlined the line, ‘The contempt and hatred of all that perishes, changes, and varies: whence comes this valuation of stability?’ Whitehead also finds Nietzsche pondering inter-connectedness, another psychedelic philosophy staple. He also gets his luminous marker out for, ‘It is essential that one should not mistake the part that ‘consciousness’ plays: it is our relation to the outer world; it was the outer world that developed it.’ Sjöstedt-Hughes draws further parallels between the will to power and Alfred North-Whitehead’s examination of consciousness providing our sense of purpose. “I am an anarch in space… a meta-historian in time” Repressed by the slave morality, we are mostly forbidden to sate the instincts that torture us unheeded. Honing our arete, the ancient Greek term for a sense of purpose that they aspired to instead of ‘happiness’ contemporary Western society considers irresponsible and selfish. It certainly does not encourage or revere our cyclical development like the ancient Egyptians. Let alone steaming around openly admitting “I am no man. I am dynamite,” like Nietzsche. Terrence McKenna considered ‘lived experience’ to be the ultimate form of spirituality. The path to virtu, notoriously, involves actions we find daunting yet fulfilling. Although hedonists will be pleased to know arete and the will to power don’t need to involve soul-shattering grail quests, or crossing the abyss, all the time… or not at least. Ask Ernst Junger. He might have decreed, “What doesn’t kill me makes me stronger; and what kills me makes me incredibly strong,” but he also swore by: “The Epicurean is the master of pleasure and knows how to moderate it, not so much from subjection to discipline as from the love of pleasure itself.” Always Dionysus – never the crucified. Related reading Can you hold your own? Cosmic Midwifery74:T19ba,Medical The performance enhancing and problem solving powers of psychedelics are growing in legitimacy and acceptance By Sidone Roddam via Gallery 46 Psychedelic philosophy endorses mind-expanding supplement use as ethically sound plus highly beneficial to discovery and innovation. Scientific problem solving with psychedelics is the pet subject of Psychedelic Explorer’s Guide author Dr James Fadiman to this day. “It would be horrific if psychedelics just turned into anti-depressants,” says Dr Sjöstedt-Hughes, “What a waste of our psychedelic renaissance.” The ideology begins its case for supplemental LSD use with historical examples, like Nietzsche’s concept of moral relativity. The moustachioed firebrand challenged conservative christian ethics he concluded were toxic to society. Nietzsche believed the church promoted a ‘slave morality’ that he claimed advantaged the unadventurous and the unmotivated – crucially at the expense of the more inspired. “As with after-work drinks not everyone wants to take part” Admittedly Nietzsche could come across as a little problematic. So the argument in favour of psychedelic use for self-improvement also deploys topical markers of acceptability. “Carey Mullins said he ‘learned to use his visual problem solving imagination’ and that led to the applications of DNA,” is one of Psychedelic Philosophy author Dr Chris Letheby’s favourite pieces of lecture ammo. Mullins’ open declaration of how much impact LSD had on his studies also makes an appearance in the summer ’22 paper in Drug Science, Policy and Law . “Many scientific insights were partially if not wholly dependent on criminalised activity” Psychedelics as potential catalysts of scientific creativity and insight by Drs David Luke and Sam Gandy presents a watertight case for creative problem solving under low doses of LSD (40ug to 100ug have been used in limited official trials over the decades) and otherwise. The clarion call deploys history, philosophy, scientific thinking and direct quotes from the likes of Einstein: “The most beautiful experience we can have is the mysterious. It is the fundamental emotion that stands at the cradle of true art and true science.” The paper covers the importance of dreams and ‘visions’ in personal and scientific breakthroughs, citing declarations from Google creator Larry Page and Dmitri Mendeleev’s periodic table. It lists the inventors who’ve cited their psychedelic use itself: Apple boss Steve Jobs claimed the drugs advised him to focus on product quality over revenue generation, and contemporary physicist Carlo Rovelli claims psychedelics gave him an understanding of the nature of time which inspired his career. “Many of the insights outlined, including the Nobel Prize-winning discovery of PCR, were partially if not wholly dependent on criminalised activity… the potential of psychedelics as agents to support creative thinking demonstrates the restrictiveness of a ‘health-only’ classification that fails to holistically consider the breadth of risks and benefits of drug use,” it concludes. Real life, as ever is far ahead of academia and the medical establishment, let alone politics. Data scientists like Ahnjili ZhuParris , who’s provided frameworks for microdose self-tests and speed learning on psychedelics , are at the cusp of both the ‘Quantified Self’ movement – an army of science nerds self-testing for self-improvement – and the subculture’s citizen science element. “It would be horrific if psychedelics just turned into anti-depressants” Ironically it’s exactly the attitude that eager start-up execs are drawn to. And modern-day corporatism is colonising the culture in its inimitable way. An article in the June ’22 issue of financial bible The Economist declared ‘Bosses want to feed psychedelics to their staff. Are they high? ’ It turns out tripping in the office could be a case of two steps forward, one step back. ‘As with after-work drinks, not everyone wants to, or can, take part,’ The Economist reminds us more enthusiastic readers, ‘an asset manager at a big family office reports agonising over whether or not to accept an invitation from a firm in her portfolio to an (illegal) Ayahuasca retreat at a villa in California, with a shaman flown in for the occasion.’ A portent perhaps, that even in the psychedelic renaissance we are still fretting about our workplace networking obligations. Perhaps we were naive to assume we’d glide towards a seamless new interconnectedness. More ancient forces, The Economist warns, are at play: ‘A mind-bending experience can lead workers to question everything—including capitalism and the nature of work.’ Truly we must be mindful when turning on the staff. The New Health Club and Field Trip are among the companies vying to usher in this new age of glad-handling. Which to be fair sounds a lot more compelling than Friday evening in the local Irish pub. Apparently though, life is not all about work. And neither does our career have a monopoly on problems that require solving. “I loved and desperately wanted my wife. This was a surprise to everyone including ourselves” Within the pages of 1967’s The Problem Solving Psychedelic PG Stafford and BH Golightly went to the heart of the matter. “Marriage may begin with a great deal that favours success and yet there is an appalling rate at which the relationship deteriorates… the ‘advice’ given by LSD is for the most part benevolent. Instead of encouraging disparagement of a mate for shortcomings, as may result from greater intellectual clarity, the drug generally activates emotional tolerance, if not empathy, and highlights hidden or forgotten attractive qualities.” The writers quote two husbands who underwent LSD therapy in the 60s: “I am able to talk to my wife more freely and frankly than I ever used to be. I am not so afraid of saying what I really think even if I know she will not agree. Apart from the restoration of intercourse, we really get on much better than before.” “I loved and desperately wanted my wife. This was a surprise to everyone, including ourselves, because as I said we had been through a bad time together. But under LSD it is impossible to fake anything: she was my connection with life.” Certainly a more worthwhile state of affairs than after-work drinks. Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment75:T11bb,Integration A n ew mythology is the psychedelic philosophers’ highest ambition By Kevin Quigley , works available via Gallery 46 Hardcore philosophers like Junger, Reich, Nietzsche, Spinoza and Whitehead were happiest wandering around the woods. You’d be forgiven for thinking they were only content when their books were being burned by all three of the Stalinists, Nazis and the Christian Evangelists (Spinoza and Reich’s actually were). Yet “God is nature” proclaimed Spinoza (who also was not beyond emotional intelligence, advising: “The more clearly you understand yourself and your emotions, the more you become a lover of what is.”) “We live in a post-cartesian, post-christian world,” Dr Sjöstedt-Hughes said to introduce the panel ‘Should we return to the gods of nature?’ at Amsterdam’s 2022 Institute of Art and Ideas festival, “the ecological crisis and the hard problem of consciousness steam from the bifurcation of nature. Déscartes split mind and matter; now we have thought as an extension of thought, science as extension of knowledge. and still don’t know how we get mind from meat. Viewing nature as simply physical discounts any part it plays in that.” “What are the laws of nature? Physicists say they’re constantly changing” In his Vital lecture on philosophy during the course’s first module on approaches to psychedelics, Sjöstedt-Hughes summarised: “Whitehead had the advantage of relativity and evolution: he is a combination of Einstein, Darwin and Spinoza. He concluded that nature has an intrinsic worth, not just spiritual worth. If a virus can be determined ‘living’ why not an atom or a molecule? The future is creative, not yet formed.” He cites Whitehead’s ‘Process Philosophy’ as the closest to a post-quantum physics spiritual framework humanity has. With humility – “We have to acknowledge that we are nowhere near the answers, and that 5-MEO DMT and other peak experiences bring up ontologies unfathomable to the regular Western version, or any other.” Dr Sjöstedt-Hughes’ philosophy goes beyond even the ‘panpsychism’ touched upon by voices like Anneka Harris in Conscious , where all matter contains some spark of life. It brings both ancient and renaissance hermeticism into the era where God is dead: “It combines process philosophy with Amerindian-style metaphysics, which are complex as opposed to animistic. God doesn’t ‘love’ you – he is comparable to Aristotle’s ‘prime mover’ rather than a benevolent force as such. Eternal life is now, stepping out of time.” The psychoneural, where consciousness and the physical nervous system combine, exist within and are one with the natural, material world; the ‘lived experience’ that Terrence McKenna considers superior to any spiritual system: our purpose, vessel and environment in an infinitely expanding, spherical space opera. “De Quincy said, ‘memories are never lost only found again. But what is memory?” Bellows Dr Sjöstedt-Hughes like a young Brian Blessed, “What are the laws of nature? Physicists say they’re constantly changing. If the past doesn’t exist, should it have more status than fiction?” Before whispering conspiratorially, “the druidic yearning we see in Britain could be connected.” Dr Aiden Lyon believes psychedelics could create a new mythological wisdom to underpin society. “We have to acknowledge that we are nowhere near the answers” There are now at least three Druidic orders vying for eyeballs in 21st Century Britain. Six thousand people turned up at 4:49am on summer Solstice 2022 to watch the sun hit the Heel Stone in the centre and spread rays throughout the circle. Stonehenge at Summer Solstice 2022 In a British major kind-of newspaper, noted for usually disapproving of this sort of thing , a top-rated comment below its article on the gathering reads, (sic) ‘You don’t have to travel to Stonehenge and dress up to show your love of nature, the natural world and the Earth’s life force, it is all around us. Feed the wildlife, plant flowers and trees, celebrate it that way, and respect it, it’s in us all, we are part of it. We have a Female Blackbird that literally follows us around our small garden and stands at the green house door to be let in to help herself to the box of wild bird food we have in there, what a privilege for a wild animal to communicate with us and trust us to enter into the greenhouse when we are there. There’s magic in our own gardens and stones.’76:T4b0,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Preview image from Internice Eating the Weather by Charlotte Wendy Law Graph of the Week The relationship between: Mindfulness Creativity From Mind full of ideas: A meta-analysis of the mindfulness–creativity link by Izabela Lebuda, Darya L. Zabelinab, Maciej Karwowskia (2016) My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: The Archaic Revival by Terrence McKenna. From the incredible book stall at Brick Lane Market on Sundays for £8 Not to be overshadowed by any Netflix series or glossy hardback. Much more on this guy later on in the course, but Terrence was essentially laying down the psychedelic enlightenment in the underground press decades ago. It’s full of gems for all psychedelic aficionados, not just DMT bros. Terrence muses on rthe return of The Goddess, mankind’s destiny communicating as cephalopods, urges us all to try yoga and reciting mantras while microdosing, tells mystics to nob off in favour of lived experience, and much more. Next issue: Dr Rick ‘The Strass’ Strassman goes further than ever before… several times77:T82c,My unofficial Vital Study Zine #5 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space Mary Jacoob , ‘Constellation 01’ via Gallery 46 Whitechapel The next stage of human consciousness is calling. Are we brave enough to answer? Dr David Luke is the most intrepid researcher of the psychedelic renaissance – ‘the real new psychonaut’. Straight out of London but living “on the edge… of Sussex” his inspirational investigations include DMT space exploration, the psychedelic divine feminine, biophilia (tree hugging) and psionic powers – often conducted “in the field”. David Luke dropped out of lecturing to study shamanism, and returned to Britain with consciousness expanded. Since he’s been at the vanguard of the psychedelic renaissance, consistently leading by example. Senior lecturer at all the best universities , co-founder of Breaking Convention , and director of the Ecology, Cosmos and Consciousness salon at the Institute of Ecotechnics which sounds incredible, he is a global figure in the transpersonal psychology movement. And he spoke to Vital students about it. In the Zine this week: Approach: Transpersonal psychology is back Therapy: Psychedelic mysteries of the feminine Space: Out in the field with citizen science Medical: DMT vs Death I n t e g ra l: Alchemy for the People Kool Aid Corner: Your regular round-up of trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Air provides an overview of psychedelic use, Fire concerns therapeutic applications, Water covers ‘space holding’ – the art of keeping it together, Earth is where you’ll find medical matters, and E t h e r discusses integration, the process of bringing psychedelic power into regular life . Click straight through to your pet subject above or browse the whole thing via the Vital Study Zine main page . See Dr Luke interviewed here plus a bunch more videos I put on this YouTube resource channel. Next issue: ‘Psychedelic philosophy’ aims to legitimise the culture of consciousness expansion. With Dr Peter Sjöstedt-Hughes78:Tbe5,Approach Science meets the super-normal in Stanislav Grof’s school of mental health study Stanislav Grof’s 1972 wedding to ‘Jiko’ Joan Halifax in Iceland In the 1980s transpersonal psychology staple and Way of the Psychonaut author Stanislav Grof found himself inventing holotropic breath work out of necessity after LSD faded from grace. Reflecting courageously on the flaws of transpersonal psychology, where science meets the super-normal, he nonetheless pointed out that the approach showed enormous potential for a range of treatment resistant diseases. And that it could be applied to other fields: like ecology, business, social work, maybe even medicine itself again someday. “The psychology of transformative experience” is how Dr Luke describes ‘ transpersonal psychology ’. Back in polite conversation thanks to Iain McGilchrist’s philosophy blockbuster The Matter with Things it’s the shrinks’ most progressive field, big in the 60s at Esalen and back with a vengeance thanks to everyone from ecologists to talk therapy refuseniks and engineers of the zero-point field , to pharma giants and governments with nationalised healthcare and their eyes on psychedelics’ potential to cure disease and reboot productivity. “The only revolution that can work is the inner transformation of every human being” The transpersonal are “moments that evolve your current ego identity… by stepping outside normal consciousness to connection with a wider other,” explains Dr Luke. You’re in the realm of the transpersonal when you’re feeling warm and clear after meditating or making it to church: plus when acknowledging childhood trauma, or during a full revelatory, inner-visual spiritual experience… or being abducted by aliens, having a spontaneous DMT exprience, astral projecting, arguably dreaming and so on. The discipline is “ethnogenic, cognicentric and pragmacentric” meaning entirely inclusive and accepting of other modes of consciousness. It evolved throughout the 20th century from William James’ ‘radical empiricism’ – scientific testing for the mysterious and hitherto unknown – to include Burke’s ‘cosmic consciousness’, Jung and Maslow’s pining for the mystic, and ‘post religious’ belief systems like Ken Wilbur’s integral. Grof and Halifax exchange vows. They published The Human Encounter With Death together in 1977 You still have to do the graft though. “The only revolution that can work… is the inner transformation of every human being,” said Grof, and transpersonal psychology includes a faith in humanity’s ability to evolve not only physically but mentally, spiritually… and psionically. “The mycelium is the message” grins Dr Luke, “other societies have sanctioned altered states, while ours refuses their existence.” Don’t confuse transpersonal psychology with quantum psychology . Related reading Are ‘corporadelics’ doing enough for set, setting… and society? Saving lost souls for three million years. And now with MDMA79:T844,Therapy Both genders can embrace spontaneity, intuition, change, connection and acceptance Heidi Taillefer , ‘Angels of our Nature’ there’s a print going here Dr Luke’s diverse body of work includes a blast of goddess energy. He co-edited of Psychedelic Mysteries of the Feminine: Creativity, Ecstasy, and Healing . To co-editor Maria Papaspyrou the psychedelic feminine represents self-expression, spontaneity, intuition, inclination towards change, mindfulness, connection, and acceptance. It isn’t gender-specific but archetypal: “The feminine is an elemental pattern we all carry within ourselves, whether we are men or women,” says Papaspyrou . Papaspyrou cites Gareth Hill, a Jungian analyst who divided the feminine into ‘static’ and ‘dynamic’ aspects. Static “serves the impersonal goals of life on Earth, species preservation and survival.” The dynamic “receives her wisdom by engaging with direct experience, and is receptive to knowledge that belongs to the deep inner worlds”. “The realms beyond that space belong to the feminine. There we meet what is beyond words” It is the dynamic in particular that we deny at our disservice and peril: “The dynamic feminine represents spaces that can be fascinating and ecstatic as well as terrifying and disorienting, that as a society we have learned to resist.” This is represented in myth by tantric goddess Kali who tramples men that gaze ecstatically up at her as a result, as she finally frees from the constraints of ego. We’ve all been there chaps. The feminine is psychedelic in that it encompasses concepts like cosmic union, timelessness, rebirth, and ego death. “The realms beyond that space belong to the feminine, and there we meet what is beyond words and immediate perception,” says Papaspyrou. Never mind that many sectors of the psychedelic renaissance are, or will, be served by women from social work to psychotherapy and luxury tourism. Related reading Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill W’s LSD use inspired 12-Step and cured his depression Psychedelic therapy is an art first and a science second7a:Td07,Space What can the medical sector learn from the space? “Everything,” says Dr Luke If you like this there’s another Grant Morrison reference in the issue ‘Field research’ is Dr Luke’s term for the surveys and private research projects he’s conducted on the fringes of everyday reality. “It’s citizen science at its finest – but tragically illegal,” expanded Dr Luke in answer to my question, ‘What can the medical sector learn from the psychedelic subculture?’ “I’ve invented ‘psychograms’ to represent all sorts of altered states,” he offers by way of an example, “I have about four art-stroke-science virtual reality projects on the go right now ranging from inducing synaesthesic meditation to interplanetary inter-connectedness and the tarot,” he says. “It’s the inverse – you alter your perception to change your brain, rather than alter your brain to change your perception. We have things like that at the festivals, they supposedly replicate the effects psychedelics… at least on paper according to the tests. I slightly don’t believe it, but there is massive potential.” While keen to stress that “psychedelics are not a panacea” like all authentic experts, extensive surveys conducted by Dr Luke and his team “show that they can be good for all kinds of things actually, from autism to Parkinson’s.” “This is the intersection of science, and genuine transcendence of time/space to bring back information” In the suburban living rooms of Britain something stirs. “We go round to people’s houses, it’s much more pleasant for the subjects. We did some experiments with precognitive individuals, and put shared experiences declared by ayahuasca users under the microscope: two people, experienced users who didn’t know each other, weren’t allowed to talk beforehand, attempted to join each other in the experience, and were interviewed separately afterwards. I haven’t fully evaluated the data as independent judges are interpreting the reports and images. But just eyeballing the material, I thought it was a long shot but… it looks like we’re going to get something quite significant. Albert Hoffman saw the doctor coming with an obsidian knife and feathered headdress. He knew where the provenance; his colleagues in Basle had similar visions, but no idea of any connection to Mexico or the Inca.” This is the intersection of science, “and genuine transcendence of time and space to bring back information,” declares Dr Luke, “I’ve been looking into creative problem solving with scientists in DMT, bridging the gap between shamanism and science. It speaks to the very nature of reality, the meeting point between world views. And nobody’s asking these questions. They’re asking ‘What does it do in the brain?’ questions. And they’re getting ‘What it does in the brain’ kind of answers. They don’t engage with the glaring ontological questions about the nature of reality.” He believes the obvious experts to ask, like many actually do, are the DMT explorers of the Amazon . “Collectively as a culture they have thousands of years of expertise,” Dr Luke says, “They were the original keeps of the wisdom and the substances. They haven’t been invited to the table at these multi billion dollar conferences.”7b:Te05,Medical Is DMT hyperspace the afterlife and do we become an ‘entity’ when we die? Mary Jacoob ‘Nexus 02’ via Gallery 46 DMT is produced in the body at the moment our physical existence ends. And, according to a recent paper by proper brainbox Dr Christopher Timmerman, DMT replicates the near death experience (NDE) . So is DMT intended only for that final event in our lives? And is a DMT trip a ticket to the realm beyond? Judging by his own enthusiastic research “the truth is “going to be more complex,” says Dr Luke, who has studied more than one shamanistic tradition first hand in detail. “There are features of the DMT experience you don’t get with NDE,” says Dr Luke, “Intense geometric patterns and colours for example, which are fundamental. Encounters with deceased relatives, and premonition [predicting the future] are less common in DMT. But 4-5% of people who take DMT have a ‘deceased encounter’ – but no ‘life review’ or ‘tunnel’.” ‘DMT entities’ are also unique to substance, Dr Luke adds. “Then there are the encounters with little people that have been around for a long time,” he says, “Graham Hancock made a direct comparison with them to modern-day alien abduction experiences. Although traditionally they were associated with the world of the dead. There’s many layers – the two not the same, I would say. They may be related. DMT may be ‘released’ at death. It may be created in the pineal gland. But we don’t have enough hard evidence.” There are many other hypotheses: “I have colleagues who believe DMT entities are ‘intro-ceptive.’ You’re encountering your own micro-biome, mitochondria or other internal structures,” says Dr Luke, “Interesting theory, but it doesn’t account for the 25 -foot tall preying mantises.” DMT is prevalent at much higher levels in the human body than previously believed. Maybe to the same extent as serotonin, to which it is increasingly compared So should we, like our mate says, avoid taking DMT in case it uses up all our death high, and our eventual moment of union with the cosmic whole is, like, a dud? According to hardcore research where scientists monitored the brain activity in rats while they died , DMT is produced at six times the normal level at the moment of extermination. But other chemicals, including serotonin, noradrenaline and dopamine are blasted at many more times the normal levels. “There’s very good reasons to think DMT is produced in the human pineal gland,” says Dr Luke, “but it could be made in the body.” In 2019 a heavyweight paper from the DMT Quest organisation concluded DMT is prevalent at much higher levels in the human body than previously believed; even to the same extent as serotonin, to which it is increasingly compared. The pineal gland is tiny, points out Dr Luke, and said experiments on rats were also conducted on another set of rats who’d had their pineal glands removed. DMT was still produced at large quantities upon death. While we’re asking questions like ‘are entities real?’ in the pub, more ambitious brains are looking into the relationship between the pineal gland, DMT and autism (upon which Dr Luke has conducted surveys suggesting “extremely promising data”). While dudes like Andrew Gilmore and Anton Bilton are talking about setting up a DMT hyperspace station for extended exploration and communion. Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment7c:T5ed,In te gr at io n The psychedelic revolution is already happening By Brian Bolland from Grant Morrison’s The Invisibles It’s time to take the psychedelic destiny that is rightfully ours. Which doesn’t have to involve anything too jarring. Stanislav Grof said “It would be nice to see people be able to go for hikes, or go swimming.” Albert Hoffman insisted LSD was experienced in the wild. “I used to go surfing, I’m a big fan of watersports on psychedelics,” giggles Dr Luke, “A lot of the outdoor-wilderness extreme sports have gone hand in hand with psychedelic culture.” James Oroc was the Burning Man face and 5-MEO author better known to extreme sports fans as paraglider ‘Kiwi’ Johnston, who passed away doing what he loved in 2020. “Ecologists in Europe have druids involved. Which is my fault” Morphic resonance – relating to the consciousness of others, said to be a skill of Shipibo ayahuasca healers – is strong in ceremonial groups. “Will I ever be able to conduct forest therapy with a hundred, maybe ten thousand people?” dreamed aloud one Vital student in the Q&A after Dr Luke’s speech. “Ecologists in Europe have druids involved, which is my fault,” was all the esoteric scientist could offer unfortunately, with acceptance on that scale being so far away. Although what with MDMA apparently being a psychedelic now, we’ve been in ceremony outdoors, admittedly with the drumming updated, for a while now . Here’s to James Oroc and all the rave ancestors.7d:T407,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph/visual aid of the Week Comparison of entopic phenomena with the cave art of the San, the Coso and of Upper Paleolithic Europe After Lewis-Williams and Dowson, 1988 From: Visionary: The Mysterious Origins of Human Consciousness (The Definitive Edition of Supernatural) (2022) by Graham Hancock My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: The Secret of the Yamas by that John McAfee From a Buddhist centre in Birmingham for £9 Before he invented anti-virus software and became a tech billionaire John McAfee was a meditation teacher. He wrote this book, considered a classic amongst aficionados. Eventually there was the whole thing in Belize. The abyss claims another: “Arrakis has seen men like you come, and go.” Non-duality is not necessarily peaceful. The anima works in notoriously, poetically mysterious ways. Next issue: Dr Sjöstedt-Hughes and psychedelic philosophy7e:T3c9c,Vital Zine #5 featuring observations from my studies and recent happenings in the space Mary Jacoob , ‘Constellation 01’ via Gallery 46 Whitechapel The next stage of human consciousness is calling. Are we brave enough to answer? Dr David Luke is the most intrepid researcher of the psychedelic renaissance – ‘the real new psychonaut’. Straight out of London but living “on the edge… of Sussex” his inspirational investigations include DMT space exploration, the psychedelic divine feminine, biophilia (tree hugging) and psionic powers – often conducted “in the field”. David Luke dropped out of lecturing to study shamanism, and returned to Britain with consciousness expanded. Since he’s been at the vanguard of the psychedelic renaissance, consistently leading by example. Senior lecturer at all the best universities , co-founder of Breaking Convention , and director of the Ecology, Cosmos and Consciousness salon at the Institute of Ecotechnics which sounds incredible, he is a global figure in the transpersonal psychology movement. And he spoke to Vital students about it. In the Zine this week: Approach: Transpersonal psychology is back and this time it’s real Therapy: The Psychedelic Divine Feminine Space: Field Research Medical: DMT Vs Death Integral: Alchemy for the People Plus! Graph/Visual Aid of the Week and second hand books Approach Transpersonal psychology is back and this time it’s real Stanislave Gorf’s 1972 wedding to ‘Jiko’ Joan Halifax in Iceland In the 1980s transpersonal psychology staple and Way of the Psychonaut author Stanislav Grof found himself inventing holotropic breathwork out of necessity after LSD faded from grace. Reflecting courageously on the flaws of transpersonal psychology, where science meets the super-normal, he nonetheless pointed out that the approach showed enormous potential for a range of treatment resistant diseases. And that it could be applied to other fields: like ecology, business, social work, maybe even medicine itself again someday. “The psychology of transformative experience” is how Dr Luke describes ‘ transpersonal psychology ’. Back in polite conversation thanks to Iain McGilchrist’s philosophy blockbuster The Matter with Things it’s the shrinks’ most progressive field, big in the 60s at Esalen and back with a vengeance thanks to everyone from ecologists to talk therapy refuseniks and engineers of the zero-point field , to pharma giants and governments with nationalised healthcare and their eyes on psychedelics’ potential to cure disease and reboot productivity. “The only revolution that can work… is the inner transformation of every human being” The transpersonal are “moments that evolve your current ego identity… by stepping outside normal consciousness to connection with a wider other,” explains Dr Luke. You’re in the realm of the transpersonal when you’re feeling warm and clear after meditating or making it to church: plus when acknowledging childhood trauma, or during a full revelatory, inner-visual spiritual experience… or being abducted by aliens, having a spontaneous DMT exprience, astral projecting, arguably dreaming and so on. The discipline is “ethnogenic, cognicentric and pragmacentric” meaning entirely inclusive and accepting of other modes of consciousness. It evolved throughout the 20th century from William James’ ‘radical empiricism’ – scientific testing for the mysterious and hitherto unknown – to include Burke’s ‘cosmic consciousness’, Jung and Maslow’s pining for the mystic, and ‘post religious’ belief systems like Ken Wilbur’s integral. Grof and Halifax exchange vows. The published The Human Encounter With Death together in 1977 You still have to do the graft though. “The only revolution that can work… is the inner transformation of every human being,” said Grof, and transpersonal psychology includes a faith in humanity’s ability to evolve not only physically but mentally, spiritually… and psionically. “The mycelium is the message” grins Dr Luke, “other societies have sanctioned altered states, while ours refuses their existence.” Don’t confuse transpersonal psychology with quantuum psychology . Therapy Psychedelic Mysteries of the Feminine Heidi Taillefer , ‘Angels of our Nature’ there’s a print going here Dr Luke’s diverse body of work includes goddess energy. And not just the kind that cooks. He co-edited of Psychedelic Mysteries of the Feminine: Creativity, Ecstasy, and Healing . To co-editor Maria Papaspyrou the psychdelic feminine represents self-expression, spontaneity, intuition, inclination towards change, mindfulness, connection, and acceptance. It isn’t gender-specific but archetypal: “the feminine is an elemental pattern we all carry within ourselves, whether we are men or women,” says Papaspyrou . She cites Gareth Hill, a Jungian analyst who divided the feminine into ‘static’ and ‘dynamic’ aspects. Static “serves the impersonal goals of life on Earth, species preservation and survival.” The dynamic “receives her wisdom by engaging with direct experience, and is receptive to knowledge that belongs to the deep inner worlds”. “The realms beyond that space belong to the feminine, and there we meet what is beyond words” It is the dynamic in particular that we deny at our disservice and peril: “The dynamic feminine represents spaces that can be fascinating and ecstatic as well as terrifying and disorienting, that as a society we have learned to resist.” This is represented in myth by tantric goddess Kali who tramples men that gaze ecstatically up at her as a result, as she finally frees from the constraints of ego. We’ve all been there chaps. The feminine is psychedelic in that it encompasses concepts like cosmic union, timelessness, rebirth, and ego death. “The realms beyond that space belong to the feminine, and there we meet what is beyond words and immediate perception,” says Papaspyrou. Never mind that many sectors of the psychedelic renaissance are, or will, be served by women from social work to psychotherapy and luxury tourism. Space Out in the Field If you like this there’s another Grant Morrison reference below “What can the medical sector learn from the psychedelic subcultre? Everything.” “It’s citizen science at its finest – but tragically illegal,” further replied Dr. Luke to my question. ‘Field research’ is his term for the surveys and private research projects he’s conducted on the fringes of everyday reality. “I’ve invented ‘psychograms’ to represent all sorts of altered states. I have about four art-stroke-science virtual reality projects on the go right now rangng from inducing synaesthesic meditation to interplanetary inter-connectedness and the tarot,” says Dr Luke, “It’s the inverse – you alter your perception to change your brain, rather than alter your brain to change your perception. We have things like that at the festivals, they supposedly replicate the effects psychedelics… at least on paper according to the tests. I slightly don’t believe it, but there is massive potential.” While keen to stress that “psychedelics are not a panacea” like all authentic experts, extensive surveys conducted by Dr Luke and his team “show that they can be good for all kinds of things actually, from autism to Parkinson’s.” “This is the intersection of science, and genuine transcendence of time/space to bring back information” In the suburban living rooms of Britain something stirs. “We go round to people’s houses, it’s much more pleasant for the subjects. We did some experiments with precognitive individuals, and put shared experiences declared by ayahuasca users under the microscope: two people, experienced users who didn’t know each other, weren’t allowed to talk beforehand, attempted to join each other in the experience, and were interviewed separately afterwards. I haven’t fully evaluated the data as indepenent judges are interpeting the reports and images. But just eyeballing the material, I thought it was a long shot but… it looks like we’re going to get something quite significant. Albert Hoffman saw the doctor coming with an obsidian knife and feathered headdress. He knew where the provenance; his colleagues in Basle had similar visions, but no idea of any connection to Mexico or the Inca.” This is the intersection of science, “and genuine transcendence of time and space to bring back information,” declares Dr Luke, “I’ve been looking into creative problem solving with scientists in DMT, bridging the gap betwen shamanism and science. It speaks to the very nature of reality, the meeting point between worldviews. And nobody’s asking these questions. They’re asking ‘What does it do in the brain?’ questions. And they’re getting ‘What it does in the brain’ kind of answers. They don’t engage with the glaring ontological questions about the nature of reality.” He believes the obvious experts to turn to, like many actually do, are the DMT explorers of the Amazon. “Collectively as a culture they have thousands of years of expertise They were the original keeps of the wisdom and the substances. They haven’t been invited to the table at these multi billion dollar conferences.” Medical DMT Vs Death Mary Jacoob , ‘Nexus 03’ via Gallery 46 Whitechapel Is DMT space the afterlife, and do we go there when we die… to be an entity? According to a recent paper by proper brainbox Dr Christopher Timmerman, DMT replicates the near death experience (NDE). Judging by his own enthusiastic research “the truth is “going to be more complex,” says Dr Luke, who has studied more than one shamanistic tradition first hand in detail. “There are features of the DMT experience you don’t get with NDE. Intense geometric patterns and colours for example, which are fundamental. Encounters with deceased relatives, and premonition [predicting the future] are less common in DMT. But 4-5% of people who take DMT have a ‘deceased encounter’ – but no ‘life review’ or ‘tunnel’. Then there are the encounters with little people that have been around for a long time. Graham Hancock made a direct comparison to modern-day alien abduction experiences. Although traditionally they were associated with the world of the dead. There’s many layers – the two not the same, I would say. They may be related. DMT may be ‘released’ at death. It may be created in the pineal gland. But we don’t have enough hard evidence.” There are many other hypotheses: “I have colleagues who believe DMT entities are ‘intro-ceptive.’ You’re encountering your own micro-biome, mitochondria or other internal structures. Interesting theory, but it doesn’t account for the 25 -foot tall preying mantises.” DMT is prevalent at much higher levels in the human body than previously believed. Maybe to the same extent as serotonin, to which it is increasingly compared So should we, like our mate says, avoid taking DMT in case it uses up all our death high, and our eventual moment momet of union with cosmic whole is, like, a dud? According to hardcore research where scientsists monitored the brain activity in rats while they died , DMT is produced at six times the normal level at the moment of extermination. But other chemicals, including serotonin, noradrenaline and dopamine are blasted at many more times the normal levels. “There’s very good reasons to think DMT is produced in the human pineal gland,” says Dr Luke, “but it could be made in the body.” In 2019 a heavyweight paper from the DMT Quest organisation concluded DMT is prevalent at much higher levels in the human body than previously believed; even to the same extent as serotonin, to which it is increasingly compared. The pineal gland is tiny, points out Dr Luke, and said expirements on rats were also conducted on another set of rats who’d had their pineal glands removed. DMT was still produced at large quantities upon death. While we’re asking questions like ‘are entities real?’ in the pub, more ambitious brains are looking into the relationship between the pineal gland, DMT and autism (upon which Dr Luke has conducted surveys suggesting “extremely promsing data”) while dudes like Andrew Gilmore and Anton Bilton are talking about setitng up a DMT hyperspace station for extended exploration and communion. I n t e g ra l Alchemy for the People By Brian Bolland from Grant Morrison’s The Invisibles Stanislav Grof said “It would be nice to see people be able to go for hikes, or go swimming.” Albert Hoffman insisted LSD was experienced in the wild. “I used to go surfing, I’m a big fan of watersports on psychedelics,” giggles Dr Luke, “A lot of the outdoor-wilderness extreme sports have gone hand in hand with psychedelic culture.” James Oroc was the Burning Man face and 5-MEO author better known to extreme sports fans as paraglider ‘Kiwi’ Johnston, who passed away doing what he loved in 2020. “Ecologists in Europe have druids involved, which is my fault,” Morphic resonance – relating to the consciousness of others, said to be a skill of shipibo ayahuasca healers – is strong in ceremonial groups. “Will I ever be able to conuct forest therapy with a hundred, maybe ten thousand people?” dreamed aloud one Vital student in the Q&A. “Ecologists in Europe have druids involved, which is my fault,” was all Dr Luke could unfortunately offer, with acceptance on that scale being so far away. Although what with MDMA apparently being a psychedelic now, we’ve been in ceremony outdoors, admittedly with the drumming updated, for a while now . Here’s to James Oroc and all the rave ancestors. Kool-Aid Corner To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph/visual aid of the Week Comparison of entopic phenomena with the cave art of the San, the Coso and of Upper Paleolithic Europe After Lewis-Williams and Dowson, 1988 From: Visionary: The Mysterious Origins of Human Consciousness (The Definitive Edition of Supernatural) (2022) by Graham Hancock My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only This week: The Secret of the Yamas by that John McAfee Before he invented anti-virus software and became a tech billionaire John McAfee was a meditation teacher. He wrote this book, considered a classic amongst aficionados. Eventually there was the whole thing in Belize. The abyss claims another: “Arrakis has seen men like you come, and go.” Non-duality is not necessarily peaceful. The anima works in notoriously, poetically mysterious ways. Next issue: Contemporary Philosophy of Psychedelics This blog is not affiliated to Vital beyond my study on the course. The content shouldn’t be taken as representative as it’s a personal reflection and includes my own lived experience of the sector too. Psychedelic drugs are prohibited in the UK, other countries and most US states. I do not condone their use nor am I evangelising for, or recommending them to you. There are more qualified people you can turn to in the Resources section but if you are considering psychedelic treatments the best person to speak to is probably your own therapist, counsellor, or doctor. Related reading Vital Study Zine Week One: The Ground Zero of LSD Research Kool-Aid Corner #37f:T80b,My unofficial Vital Student Zine features observations from the course and beyond Harvard psychology professor Richard Alpert after he took LSD and remaned himself Ram Dass Dr Bill Richards is a staple of the modern-day mystery school researching psychedelics. He’s worked alongside Abraham Maslow, Stanislav Grof, Walter Pahnke and more. Now installed at the Johns Hopkins Centre for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research, he passed trade secrets on to Vital students. Week four lecturer Dr Bill Richards volunteered for LSD testing as a restless theology student in post-WW2 Germany. He began working alongside Hanscarl Leuner, the German psychologist who invented Guided Affective Imagery (a perverse form of which was used in the brainwashing sequence of A Clockwork Orange ), plus added both art and group therapy to LSD tests. Richards went on to become the most prolific psychedelic researcher of all time, working alongside Walter Pahnke, Abraham Maslow, Stanislav Grof, and now Roland Griffiths: he was last out of Spring Grove in 1977, first into the fledgling Johns Hopkins Centre for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research in 1999, and is still working today. His book Sacred Knowledge: Psychedelics and Religious Experiences is out now. See Bill interviewed here plus a bunch more I put on this YouTube resource channel. These five items I pulled from the week’s research are themed along Vital’s natural element-themed structure. Approach: The Wisdom of the Human Mind Therapy: H ealing with Laughter Space: Cosmic Midwifery Medical: LSD – Did it Ever Go Away? I n t e g ra l: The Wr ong Myst e r i e s Air provides an overview of approaches to psychedelic use, Fire concerns therapeutic applications, Water covers ‘space holding’ – the art of keeping it together, Earth is where you’ll find medical matters, and E t h e r discusses integration, the process of bringing psychedelic power into regular life . Next issue: The real ‘new psychonaut’ London’s Dr David Luke reboots transpersonal psychology for the 22nd Century80:T911,Approach Psychedelic treatment prompts our inner self to do the healing The Centre for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research at Johns Hopkins Medicine, Maryland USA “I’ve learned to trust how wise the mind is, and how it brings things up the right way, at the right time,” says Dr Richards on the unpredictability of psychedelic experience. Richards believes his methodist upbringing “saved” him from melting down when left alone in a 1963 testing chamber. His spiritual voyage was considered an intriguing anomaly at the time; other test subjects had indeed mimicked insanity when given LSD in an empty room with zero preparation for what may come. Schoolin’ around– (L to R) Alan Watts, Allen Ginsberg, Timothy Leary, and Gary Snyder at the Houseboat Summit in 1967 Richards only ever enjoyed one more trip on that level, his fifth, after he and Walter Pahnke devised ‘set and setting’, venturing into nature for the first time. Richards certainly relishes the mystical aspect now considered key to significant psychedelic healing. Though he advises that “It’s not a dud if it’s not transcendental,” and what arises from the experience is “what needs to.” Revelation can occur with eyes closed or open, when installed firmly on the couch wearing headphones or roaming through the wilderness… and whether the experience transcendent, farcical, wild, philosophical, relaxing or downright awful. “This is the growing edge of spiritual development. We must condone knowledge” The attitude best to prepare the voyager with is one of “Courage, adventure, desire for development, and abandonment of persona,” says Richards. In The Psychology of Money Morgan Housel points out that we all invest money with different reasons, tastes, and circumstances. Then we worry that we’re not doing what the other dude who’s supposedly doing it totally right is doing. Steve McQueen and Nelie Adams in the steam rooms at Esalen To some, guiding individuals towards their own neo-shamanic state is glib at best and dangerously foolhardy at worst. But the most experienced western psychedelic therapist of the past sixty years says, “This is the growing edge of spiritual development. The Western World has brought many positive innovations to the experience, and we must condone knowledge.”81:T778,Space Psychedelic therapy sets the stage for new life to flourish Leonora Carrington, ‘The Temple of the Word’ The psychedelic therapist offers presence, but doesn’t require reporting on behalf of the client. “At a very high dose, we are beyond words anyway,” advises Dr Richards. Guides are “like midwives, they create a container” to encourage the voyager’s “own choreography of the experience.” Voyagers should be prepped to “dive into the pupil of the monster” lest one pounce from the shadows of their psyche. Challenging experiences are actually quite unusual (only 40% of users say they’ve had ever one) but “we all have our cross to bear – our trauma” reminds Dr Richards. “We are primarily dealing with human consciousness,” says the Maryland and Spring Grove veteran, “a meaningful process unfolding from within.” He says objects to examine and inspire, personal or otherwise, can be offered to the voyager who appears inquisitive. “We are primarily dealing with human consciousness” Guides practising in legally permitted conditions from my study group say music is a fine changer of mood, especially with those who may have difficulty expressing their mystical sides. These “external routes to mystical consciousness” as Dr Richards dubs them, like the rose bud of lost era lore, or family photos used by silver age guides, can ‘make the energy dance’ like Alfred North Whitehead suggested. Suddenly everything is important, but somehow irrelevant, and both are absolutely fine. Unless they’re not. “Philosophy is the self-correction by consciousness of its own initial excess of subjectivity,” wrote Whitehead in Process and Reality: An Essay on Cosmology , “[it] may not neglect the multifariousness of the world — the fairies dance, and Christ is nailed to the cross.“ Quite. Related reading Can you hold your own? Kool-Aid Corner #482:T5ed,Therapy It’s okay to get the giggles says the space’s most storied therapist David Shrigley, ‘You are Very Important’ It’s okay to have a chuckle, or a cry, ‘in ceremony’. We could all probably do with one. “Some patients have an intuitive understanding of the transcendent. Some just giggle,” says Dr Richards. “For many of us intellectualisation is our primary form of armouring,” continues the seasoned psychedelic therapist, “tell participants to appreciate their thinking minds, but let themselves go out and play. See your patient going through states of wisdom, vulnerability…” and be prepared for pranksterism. The voyager might not be feeling especially mystic today, and that’s their prerogative. “A playful experience may actually be what’s needed,” says Richards. The god of laughter deserves reverence also. “We are primarily dealing with human consciousness, a meaningful process unfolding from within” Reverence is appropriate to tradition, but welcome to the aeon where do what we wilt, not least out of necessity. Fortune favours the brave: the two-guide format, for example, began because researchers couldn’t hold their subject’s hand and change the record on the turntable at the same time. There’s an anecdote that might get you some laughs in over-intellectualising psychedelic circles. Related reading Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill W’s LSD use inspired 12-Step and cured his depression Psychedelic therapy is an art first and a science second83:T3bd3,Issue #4: My weekly unofficial Vital Student Zine features observations from the course and beyond Harvard psychology professor Richard Alpert after he took LSD and remaned himself Ram Dass Dr Bill Richards is a staple of the modern-day mystery school researching psychedelics. He’s worked alongside Abraham Maslow, Stanislav Grof, Walter Pahnke and more. Now installed at the John Hopkins Centre for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research, he passed trade secrets on to Vital students. Week four lecturer Dr Bill Richards volunteered for LSD testing as a restless theology student in post-WW2 Germany. He began working alongside Hanscarl Leuner, the German psychologist who invented Guided Affective Imagery (a perverse form of which was used in the brainwashing sequence of A Clockwork Orange ), plus added both art and group therapy to LSD tests. Richards went on to become the most prolific psychedelic researcher of all time, working alongside Walter Pahnke, Abraham Maslow, Stanislav Grof, and now Roland Griffiths: he was last out of Spring Grove in 1977, first into the fledgling John Hopkins Centre for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research in 1999, and is still working today. His book Sacred Knowledge: Psychedelics and Religious Experiences is out now. Thumbnail image: Jane Graverol, ‘L’École de la Vanité’ In the Zine this week, arranged in the synaesthesic schema used for Vital’s cirriculum: Approach: Wisdom of the Human Mind Therapy: Healing Power of Laughter Space: Cosmic Midwifery Medical: LSD – Did it Ever Go Away? I n t e g ra l: The Wr ong Myst e r i e s Plus! Graph/Visual Aid of the Week and second hand books Approach The Wisdom of the Human Mind The Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research at Johns Hopkins Medicine, Maryland USA “I’ve learned to trust how wise the mind is, and how it brings things up the right way, at the right time,” says Dr Richards on the unpredictability of psychedelic experience. Richards believes his methodist upbringing “saved” him from melting down when left alone in a 1963 testing chamber. His spiritual voyage was considered an intriguing anomaly at the time; other test subjects had indeed mimicked insanity when given LSD in an empty room with zero preparation for what may come. Schoolin’ around– (L to R) Alan Watts, Allen Ginsberg, Timothy Leary, and Gary Snyder at the Houseboat Summit in 1967 Richards only ever enjoyed one more trip on that level, his fifth, after he and Walter Pahnke devised ‘set and setting’, venturing into nature for the first time. Richards certainly relishes the mystical aspect now considered key to significant psychedelic healing. Though he advises that “it’s not a dud if it’s not transcendental,” and what arises from the experience is “what needs to.” Revelation can occur with eyes closed or open, when installed firmly on the couch wearing headphones or roaming through the wilderness… and whether the experience transcendent, farcial, wild, philosophical, relaxing or downright awful. “This is the growing edge of spiritual development… we must condone knowledge” The attitude best to prepare the voyager with is one of “courage, adventure, desire for development, and abandonment of personna,” says Richards. In The Psychology of Money Morgan Housel points out that we all invest money with different reasons, tastes, and circumstances. Then we worry that we’re not doing what the other dude who’s supposedly doing it totally right is doing. Steve McQueen and Nelie Adams in the steam rooms at Esalen To some, guiding individuals towards their own neo-shamanic state is glib at best and dangerously foolhardy at worst. But the most experienced western psychedelic therapist of the past sixty years says, “This is the growing edge of spiritual development. The Western World has brought many positive innovations to the experience, and we must condone knowledge.” Therapy Healing Power of Laughter David Shrigley, ‘You are Very Important’ It’s okay to have a chuckle, or a cry, ‘in ceremony’. We could all probably do with one. “Some patients have an intuitive understanding of the transcendent. Some just giggle,” says Dr Richards. “For many of us intellectualisation is our primary form of armouring,” continues the seasoned psychedelic therapist, “tell participants to appreciate their thinking minds, but let themselves go out and play. See your patient going through states of wisdom, vulnerability…” and be prepared for pranksterism. The voyager might not be feeling especially mystic today, and that’s their prerogative. “A playful experience may actually be what’s needed,” says Richards. The god of laughter deserves reverence also. “We are primarily dealing with human consciousness… a meaningful proces unfolding from within” Reverence is appropriate to tradition, but welcome to the aeon where do what we wilt, not least out of necessity. Fortune favours the brave: the two-guide format, for example, began because researchers couldn’t hold their subject’s hand and change the record on the turntable at the same time. There’s an anecdote that might get you some laughs in over-intellectualising psychedelic circles. Space Cosmic Midwifery Leonora Carrington, ‘The Temple of the Word’ Guides are “like midwives, they create a container” to encourage the voyager’s “own choreography of the experience.” The guide offers presence, but don’t require reporting. “At a very high dose, we are beyond words anyway,” advises Dr Richards. Voyagers should be prepped to “dive into the pupil of the monster” lest one pounce from the shadows of their psyche. Challenging experiences are actually quite unusual (only 40% of users say they’ve had one) but “we all have our cross to bear – our trauma” reminds Richards. “We are primarily dealing with human consciousness,” says Dr Richards, “a meaningful proces unfolding from within.” He says objects, personal or otherwise can be offered to the voyager who appears inquisitive. “At a very high dose, we are beyond words anyway.” Guides practising in legally permitted conditions from my study group say music is a fine changer of mood, especially with those who may have difficulty expressing their mystical sides. These “external routes to mystical consciousness” as Richards dubs them, like the classic rose bud or family photo used by silver age guides, can ‘make the energy dance’ like Alfred North Whitehead suggested. Suddenly everything is important, but somehow irrelevant, and both are absolutely fine. Unless they’re not. “Philosophy is the self-correction by consciousness of its own initial excess of subjectivity,” wrote Whitehead in Process and Reality: An Essay on Cosmology , “[it] may not neglect the multifariousness of the world — the fairies dance, and Christ is nailed to the cross.“ Quite. Medical Everything you need to know about this season’s essential LSD revival trend Dolce & Gabbana men’s spring/summer ‘22 collection catwalk show The psychedelic renaissance wrote LSD off as impractical, fuddy-duddy, and just so, like long as to be downright subversive. But Sandoz-25 is back in style and the ouroboros eats its tail again. “To my mind, LSD is the best, the purest” declared Beckley Foundation’s Lady Amanda Fielding at the 2022 Psych Summit held at London’s National Gallery. After all only the bohemian elite would have the time, right? And time is money more than ever before (usual disclaimers re: existence and/or nature of time). One shudders to think that LSD is the new jetset drug of choice. Beckley are actually conducting the first serious test into microdosing with LSD. The old fave has also found favour with the restless rabble. MindMed’s stage two tests for ADHD are underway at 20µg of LSD per week, hot on the heels of its success with LSD for anxiety. MindMed’s base of Switzerland is the home of LSD after all. Dolce & Gabbana men’s spring/summer ‘22 collection catwalk show Meanwhile, Milanese glamour power house Dolce & Gabbana offers the tripwear of choice for sartorial psychonauts in its spring/summer 2022 menswear collection. See you at the sample sale. I n t e g ra l Th e W rong Myst e r i e s ‘The Star’ by Devan Shimoyama available here What is a mystery school? Are we in one now? Should we be? And what are we doing there? The ‘Mystery School’ is a heartfelt trope amongst some psychedelic users. It evokes not only the acceptance that us ‘remarkable’ former children of ‘unremarkable parents’ (er, Miller 1996 ) crave, but also a comforting sense of relevance – that we, and not the suits, are actually directing things from behind the scenes . After all, the ‘Illuminati’ pyramid-with-an-eye-on-it which appears on dollar bills was pinched off Martin Luther by the esoteric protestants under England’s Queen Elizabeth the First, hence its shadowy undertones. Cliquiness is unchracteristically intrinsic to psychedelic experience: from the in-crowds at Euleusis and the Platonic Academy through to Esalen and the 21st century Tyringham Initiative , to the “it’s only us tripping” bond between pre-acceptance users and the current impulse to put a gatekeeper on ‘shamanism’. Students are undertaking ‘Diversity, Inclusion and Cultural Competence Tutoring’ as part of Vital. In the interests of silence being violence, I don’t feel it’s inappropriate for me to experience shame – the actually uncomfortable, ‘only way out is through’ kind – having enjoyed many benefits of multicultural society, let alone colonialism, with none of the drawbacks the people of colour around me faced (you don’t have to agree with that). And if it helps the Vital student body feel safer with, and closer to, each other then it’s a monster I’ll enthusiastically “dive into the pupil of” as Dr Richards puts it. So far this actually seems like it has worked. Which is fantasic. “For many of us, intellectualisation is our primary form of armouring” I do try, in my white way, to engage friends in this conversation. They’ll certainly speak about their racial experience in the UK, and sometimes painfully in that deadpan way that makes the aside so much more shocking. But their tales are personal, because it’s a personal conversation. These valuable monologues end with “you know me, Steve, I’m not going to give you the narrative” which is exactly the sort of thing I’d bloody say. Squirming on my part has been met at least once by satisfied laughter and V-signs. This fragile white man will not be given closure via his intellectualised debate, and is sobered instead by the serene sort of first hand testimony that the righteous deliver so gracefully. Vital brought in next-gen ‘Diversity, Inclusion and Cultural Competence Tutoring’. The lead facilitator was novellist and psychologist Ayize Jama-Everett. He wrote The Entropy of Bones an existential martial arts novel, so had me at that. If you’re reading this Ayize we can nerd out on all this any time here’s my email . Jama-Everett was keen to distance the programme from what we know as ‘diversity training’. His team’s approach is founded in work around differing, unsaid aproaches amongst multicultural communities, which is actually necessary and courageous work. Obviously there are differences in the American conversation – nobody in US race training mentions the excesses of the Raj, for example. Very few British people of colour descended from slaves; instead they emigrated to post-war Britain, brimming with optimism, to find a war-ravaged, poverty-stricken, tired and grey country that offered little welcome and sometimes outright hostility. I actually do think that Western society is ‘institutionally racist’ (again you don’t have to agree) and was a bit embarrassed to find out that the approach wasn’t widely accepted. On the flip, I also think that the cultural cometence movement would benefit from communicating using less academic language. Dancing, playing sport and making love together I believe is the best way to begin healing the divides. But even spending meaningful, intimate time together is unlikely to confront the most difficult aspects of the matter. So I commend Jama-Everett for taking it on while admitting the drawbacks of the process, and gladly reward his bravery by taking part in the process despite it involving a challenging process for myself. Now. Nicholas Spiers , a British expert on western interaction with indigeneous Amazonian peoples also headed up a lecture alongside talismanic thought leader Bia Labate . During a thorough truth-bombing about facile Western framing of Mazatec beliefs he pointed out that Marina Sabina , the shaman banker and mushroom pioneer Gordon Wasson brought to international recognition with his landlmark Life mag feature in the 1960s, had her house burned down by her neighbours for attracting too much police attention to the tradition. She died isolated and poor. Today her image is abused to market tourist traps. Hardly part of any mystery school, or renaissance. Read more and donate to Bia Labte’s Charcuna charity , intellectualise with Charcuna’s Psychedelic Justice: Toward a Diverse and Equitable Psychedelic Culture or rock this ‘Decolonise Your Mind’ T-shirt at your next gentrified neighbourhood BBQ. Kool-Aid Corner To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph/visual aid of the Week The first patent for MDMA Merck, Germany, 1912 From: The Rave: Spiritual Healing in Modern Western Subcultures by Scott R Hutson (Anthropological Quarterly, January 2000) My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only This week: Strange Ecstasies edited by Michael Parry £25 usually £100+ Stories of space narcotics by major authors collected by druid of derring-do Michael Parry (d. 2014) , including The New Accelerator by H G Wells, Subjectivity by Norman Spinrad and What to Do Until the Analyst Comes by Frederik Pohl. Plus a superb cover naturally. If you like this sort of thing and haven’t read The Employees , a 2020 Booker Prize nominee by Danish author Olga Ravn, a ‘disconcertingly quotidian space opera’ ( The Guardian ), do so at light speed. I can’t look at books like this without being hauntd by a sci fi short story about a co-ed college on a space station where the boys get these pets called teasels. I couldn’t find any reference to it online which was chilling in itself. Next issue: London’s Dr David Luke talks transpersonal psychology and much more This blog is not affiliated to Vital beyond my study on the course. The content shouldn’t be taken as representative as it’s a personal reflection and includes my own lived experience of the sector too. Psychedelic drugs are prohibited in the UK, other countries and most US states. I do not condone their use, neither am I evangelising for, or recommending them to you. There are more qualified people you can turn to in the Resources section but if you are considering psychedelic treatments the best person to speak to is probably your own therapist, counsellor, or doctor.84:T5ef,Medical Everything you need to now about this season’s essential LSD revivial trend Dolce & Gabbana men’s spring/summer ‘22 collection catwalk show The psychedelic renaissance wrote LSD off as impractical, fuddy-duddy, and just so, like long as to be downright subversive. But tastemakers are trumpeting LSD’s versatility, while trendsetters are mining its aesthetic. “To my mind, LSD is the best, the purest” declared Beckley Foundation’s Lady Amanda Fielding at the 2022 Psych Summit held at London’s National Gallery. After all only the bohemian elite would have the time, right? And time is money more than ever before (usual disclaimers re: existence and/or nature of time). One shudders to think that LSD is the new jet set drug of choice. Beckley are actually conducting the first serious test into microdosing with LSD. The old fave has also found favour with the restless rabble. MindMed’s stage two tests for ADHD are underway at 20µg of LSD twice a week, hot on the heels of its success with LSD for anxiety. MindMed’s base of Switzerland is the home of LSD after all. Meanwhile, Milanese glamour powerhouse Dolce & Gabbana offers the trip-wear of choice for sartorial psychonauts in its spring/summer 2022 menswear collection. See you at the sample sale. Dolce & Gabbana men’s spring/summer ‘22 collection catwalk show Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment85:T4028,Observations from my study on Vital and recent happenings in the space ‘Bacchus’ by Caravaggio at The Uffizi, Florence Consciousness expansion: from cave painting, to the pyramids, and the first Psych Symposium at London’s National Gallery. How far have we got? In week three Vital students heard from Dr Lenny Gibson, a clinical psychologist, philosopher and breathwork pioneer with ‘50 years of experience working with non-ordinary states of consciousness’ who nonetheless fitted in a storied career and founded transpersonal psychology non-profit Dreamshadow . Gibson’s winsome and poingnant presentation elegantly examined western attitudes towards conscious thinking. His key point was that the world beyond words is no less valid – more so, even – than what we can describe. Psychedelics connect us with our intuition: as represented by the ancient gods Cerrunos and Baal, the greek god Dionysus (Bacchus to the romans) and, yes, Jesus of Arimathea who ‘turns the water into wine’. The first art, storytelling and culture derived from rites around this divine archetype. Gibson references philosopher du jour Iain McGhilchrist , and I’ll pull out this particular quote from the Matter with Things author: “As soon as you start saying anything about this realm, you falsify it. There are certain things that simply are resistant to normal language, normal exposition. But don’t for that reason not exist.” But he began with a comparison to the Baka tribes whose genetics diverged 70,000 years ago. They describe their ceremonial group singing as “so beautiful the self melts away” just like both psychedelics and the ‘ecstatic’ techniques the rest of us have taken just as long to work out using science instead. In the Zine this week, arranged in the synaesthesic schema used for Vital’s cirriculum: Approach: Move any mountain with neo shamanism Therapy: ‘Celebrating the mysteries’ is the new euphemism of choice Space: Can you hold your own? Medical: The Microdose Age I n t e g ra l: Le ar ning to fly Plus! Graph of the Week and second hand books Approach Move Any Mountain with Neo Shamanism A neo shaman The ‘S-Word’ is getting laden. No surprise, when you consider that the criteria for shaman-hood range, depending on your understanding, from genetic lineage, grave dedication, and fighting spirits to cure treatment resistant diseases all the way to a dubious certificate, some bongos and an Instagram account. ‘Neo shamanism’ to Gibson is humankind’s recent ability to be his own wise counsel and medicine woman. The synthesis of LSD, a colourless tasteless substance able to inspire psychedelic states in minuscule amounts, he believes has democratised the role. Poetically, this most scientific of revelations has inspired a rebirth of personal spirituality and philosophic examination. Scholars will point out that it’s the first time in 500 years, a la Joe Tafur’s Legend of the Eagle and the Condor , that science and religion have conjoined, whether in the form of transpersonal psychologist Stanislav Grof or the discoveries of quantum physics. “For once, and for everyone, the truth was not still a mystery. Love called to all.” Mystical healing may be associated with the Shipibo curanderos but they don’t use the word shaman themselves. In many communities associated with ‘shamanism’ the healer role itself is rare, considered apart, and special. Scientific medical training is not uncommon amongst indegeneous mystical healers. Personally I understand exactly why usage is revered and not to be bandied about, certainly in an “I can cure you by battling with entities” manner. Gibson’s own understanding is that the neo shaman is a contemporary voyager into the new frontiers of the ‘Psyche,’ itself the name for the Greek goddess of wisdom and the soul. Obvious candidates for 20th Century LSD neo-shamanhood might be Grof, Aldous Huxley, Amanda Fielding or Jimi Hendrix. And Timothy Leary, who was scolded by RD Laing for democratising LSD… But if LSD had remained the preserve of the elite, Hendrix might never have wrote in his personal poetry after Woodstock in 1969, “For once, and for everyone, the truth was not still a mystery. Love called to all.” Mankind’s destiny calls, and we are all ordained to answer. Therapy ‘Celebrating the mysteries’ is the new euphemism of choice Above and below: kylix cup depicting Hades and Persephone from 430BC now in The British Museum Ancient Egyptian Viagra: blue lotus flowers from the Tomb of Nebanum Accessibility is a hot topic in ‘the space’ right now. At the inaugural Psych Symposium in London’s National Gallery earlier this May 2022, itself undeniably elitist at £400 for a basic one-day ticket and £1,000 for full access and the drinkies, MAPS spokesperson Natalie Lyla Ginsberg told suits that “PTSD is most common in the marginalised communities who cannot currently access these treatments.” Author Zoe Cormier eviscerated corpos with lines like, “So if it’s okay for somebody dying of bowel cancer to grow their own mushrooms, why is it not okay for normal folks?” (Answer: ‘because dosages’, to a lack of any audible groans). The Greeks famously all tripped together at the Eleusinian Mysteries, an invite-only annual bash held at the festival of Demeter for the best part of two thousand years. It’s heavily referenced in Shakespeare’s esoteric play The Tempest . Supposedly ‘The Mysteries’ was reserved only for the ‘invisible college’ wyrd and wonderful types, but high society were in on things too: “The beautful people following the interesting people, and the rich people follow the beautiful people” as a wise lady once told me. Indeed, the use of psychedelics was only proven recently when a gruelling, decades-long investigation into the local availability of psychedelic ergot was trumped by legal records prosecuting a notorious socialite for ‘celebrating the mysteries’ at dinner parties back home in Athens (he got exiled to Sparta, by the way). Current podcast staple Brian Muraresku will tell you all about psychedelic use by the early Christians. And has been recently in great interviews like this around his book The Immortality Key . The ancient greeks believed “Life can only be experienced in a truly terrifying, but transformational, encounter with death.” Ritually, the Greeks supped from elaborate kylix cups (above). Medieval witches got rampant on datura, best taken internally via the mucus membrane, by inserting it vaginally – ‘riding the broomstick’. In 2022 ketamine bumps are delivered in £5,000 inhalers, and while no one is sticking DMT up their bum just yet, the common folk are hunted and persecuted by the agents of mediocrity still. Space Can you hold your own? Kelsey Brookes, LSD Poster, available here Westerners are sorely lacking in psychedelic ritual. The Imperial College testing rooms are the most British thing I’ve ever seen , with a blanket thrown over the studio kitchen in the corner, a drape with some trees on and a lamp stuck behind it, plus some spiritual tat. It does look surprisingly cosy nonetheless, especially with Dr Ros beaming angelically from her seat in the corner. But you almost certainly have to dream the Albion way to appreciate its understated succour. Bar the open heartedness oozing from the ever-radiant Dr Ros, being served the Mysteries by the priestesses of Demeter it is not. Neither is donning a blindfold plus headphones, and boasting a grin like the one that betrays the fact you don’t normally fly business class, an experience surely at all comparable to the jungle ayahuasca one. 12-step style integration and ceremony – my bad, ‘celebrating the mysteries’ – circles were mentioned as future possibilities by Psych delegates in a huddle with Imperial College trials participants Iain Roullier and Leonie Schneider, unsung heroes of the UK space who also spoke onstage with Dr Ros repping their PsyPan set-up. In the meantime there is… an app . “The substance is only 51% of the process” ‘Holding space’ doesn’t seem to have been much of an issue during contemporary scientific tests and education regarding bad trips-stroke-challenging, purgatorial experiences may take the edge off them so to speak. Admittedly a guide, let alone a skilled psychotherapist or shaman, may be good for a bad trip too. Because surely MindMed’s ‘off switch’ jab is cheating*. An old pal has just reminded me that our sitter was a table leg with an acid house smiley face drawn on it which we kept in the back of the van. The Wild Hunt rides. *Take the off switch if they offer it or at least don’t say I told you not to Medical The Microdose Age Lady Amanda Fielding of The Beckley Foundation and now Beckley Psytech “Microdosing is a step forward for humankind.” Beckley Psytech’s Lady Amanda Fielding (for it is she) declared so at Psych Symposium. If psychedelics can be for the everyman, can they be for every day? While it’s less spectacular than ‘spiritual doses’, DMT, or ayahuasca, and an ongoing science to say the least, microdosing’s arguably taken a stronger foothold in popular culture than the next-level psychedelics. Users report similar effects to integrated major experiences, like enthusiasm, geniality, consideration and walking in the woods while listening to Jon Hopkins. Famously though microdosing – which Beckley are researching throughly – is one of the few contemporary psychedelic phenomena to fail the placebo test. Small doses are being tested on some conditions: MindMed are on stage two for 20µg of LSD twice a week, while sticking someone in a room and giving them a proper tab (200µg) did okay for GAD . The likes of New Health Club are poised to bring acid to the workplace (at last). Lenny Gibson’s observation was that ‘psyche’ also means ‘breath’, and Stanislav Grof’s holotropic breathwork could be the only option – and also a better one – for many. Professor David Nutt pointed out in his Psych presentation that it’s the ‘wellbeing’ scores that are really impressive in psychedelic therapy’s efficacy results. But according to a neuroscientist I spoke to outside when the fire alarm went off, “there are no criteria for developing drugs for ‘wellbeing’ like there might be for mental health conditions already treated pharmacologically. So everybody’s trying to make drugs, which is ruinously expensive as it is, without knowing precisely what to aim at, certainly in terms of approval.” The Mushroom Nation is at once already here, and still so far away. NB Psychedelics are prohibited in most places even if labelled ‘cacao’ and sent in gaudy packaging. You can still get busted for them like this guy . I n t e g ra l Le ar ning to f ly ‘Hyperbolic Depth’ by Wolfe Von Lenkiewicz available here “The substance is only 51% of the treatment” said Imperial College Psilodep 2 trial clinical lead scientist Dr Rosalind Watts at Psych Sumposium. It was vehemently echoed by the PsyPan patient support group alongside her on stage at London’s National Gallery. Blasting off into hyperspace is not entirely the point either reminded week four Vital lecturer Dr Lenny Gibson, who evoked Stanislav Grof: “The ecstasy of a noumenal moment, a psychedelic intoxication, is not enough for mysticism. Such a moment comes to nothing if it does not become part of a process of lived expression and expressed thinking.” Less than a week previously Dr Ros launched her Acer Integration project at the Earth Centre in Hackney. It’d take a heart of stone not to give the team at Acer credit and I, for one, liked the singing in the round. The mystic is sorely lacking in European research as Dr David Luke points out, and metropolitan Londoners, their dopamine receptors worn down to ichorous stubs, are polarised in their spiritual awakening or total lack thereof. I suspect it might be better for many if we stick to burning massive effigies and people just ‘get it’ on either a collective unconscious level or whatever. Meanwhile the stock images of millennials in the blindfold and headphones are beginning to look sinister, I reckon. Once again I find myself drawn to the intriguingly complex MAPS PTSD therapy programme, where the mystical concepts so potent for healing trauma must be dealt with ever so sensitively, because the soldiers have been driven far further from God than even my neighbours in this modern-day Babylon (I like London really; non-dual thinking). “Be kind to the guy at the grocery store. Make new friends. Put the art pedal to the floor.” While veterans and the treatment-resistant depressed crave healing – and should go to the front of the queue – the rest of us scrabble for meaning, humanity, or merely playfulness. Nonplussed yet fascinated by doxa, Plato’s term for shallow concerns, we struggle to ‘participate in eternal totality’ as Spinoza urged. Raves, ‘sex positivity’ and Burning Man-type festivals are our attempts to break through. And ‘meaning making experiences’ may indeed prompt a breakthrough or two, but that will only be the start of a long and confusing journey for some. Others, like us BJJ bores and Dragon’s Den/Shark Tank wannabees, ponder our lack of the right kind of trauma, that sweet spot sought by Neitsche , Jung, and others who rarely left their desks. The greeks did put down their books. Even Plato excelled at wrestling, competing at the Pytheon (like The Championship in English football) and Isthmian games. Both of which featured culture and sport combined incidentally. Immortality Key writer Brian Muraresku says in this great Lex Fridman interview that the greeks were also fond of saying, “Life can only be experienced in a truly terrifying, but transformational, encounter with death.” He quotes Huxley on mass radical self-transcendence and deeper understanding. Plus Alan Watts on authority being threatened by mass outbreaks of mysticism. Myth, or ontonolgy if you like, in the West and far beyond teaches that less thought is better than more. Lenny Gibson’s lifestyle advice: “Be kind to the guy at the grocery store. Make new friends. Put the art pedal to the floor.” Kool-Aid Corner To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph of the Week Ego-dissolution scores of test subjects On DMT Placebo From: DMT Models the Near-Death Experience, Christopher Timmermann, Leor Roseman, Luke Williams, David Erritzoe, Charlotte Martial, Héléna Cassol, Steven Laureys, David Nutt and Robin Carhart-Harris (Frontiers in Psychology, August 2018) My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only This week: Listen, Little Man! by Wilhelm Reich with illustrations by William Steig £6 once 60p What flirtation with western neo shamanism would be complete without a reminder that the boy who points out the emperor has no clothes is actually banished to the wilderness? It’s only in the modern version he becomes king. Other innovator-pranksters like Reich, and Plato’s favourite Socrates, end up dead. Reich never intended for this 1945 manifesto to be published. This 1977 version features incredible illustrations by William Steig, who’d go on to write Shrek . Reichian bodywork is part of helotropic breathing and bioenergetics is taught in schools. It’s more relevant than ever for detoxifying western armouring, but undoubtedly too much like hard work for most. Homemade orgone accumulators at the ready for a pssible comeback nonetheless. Buy my teacher’s new book on Reichian Character Structure to get going, it’s brilliant. Next issue: John Hopkins’ Dr Bill Richards talks 60 years of LSD This blog is not directly affiliated to Vital beyond my study on the course. The content shouldn’t be taken as representative as it’s a personal reflection and includes my own lived experience of the sector too. Psychedelic drugs are prohibited in the UK, other countries and most US states. I do not condone their use nor am I evangelising for, or recommending them to you. There are more qualified people you can turn to in the Resources section but if you are considering psychedelic treatments the best person to speak to is probably your own therapist, counsellor, or doctor.86:T4d7,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph/visual aid of the Week The first patent for MDMA From: The Rave: Spiritual Healing in Modern Western Subcultures by Scott R Hutson (Anthropological Quarterly, January 2000) My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: The Archaic Revival by Terrence McKenna. £25 usually £100+ Stories of space narcotics by major authors collected by druid of derring-do Michael Parry (d. 2014) , including The New Accelerator by H G Wells, Subjectivity by Norman Spinrad and What to Do Until the Analyst Comes by Frederik Pohl. Plus a superb cover naturally. If you like this sort of thing and haven’t read The Employees , a 2020 Booker Prize nominee by Danish author Olga Ravn, a ‘disconcertingly quotidian space opera’ ( The Guardian ), do so at light speed. I can’t look at books like this without being hauntd by a sci fi short story about a co-ed college on a space station where the boys get these pets called teasels. I couldn’t find any reference to it online which was chilling in itself. Next issue: Dr Rick ‘The Strass’ Strassman goes further than ever before… several times87:T146b,In te gr at io n Wha t i s a myst e ry scho ol? Are we in one? Should we be? And what are we doing there? ‘The Star’ by Devan Shimoyama available here The Mystery School is a heartfelt trope amongst some psychedelic users. It evokes not only the acceptance that us ‘remarkable’ former children of ‘unremarkable parents’ (er, Miller 1996 ) crave, but also a comforting sense of relevance. We, not the suits, are actually directing things from behind the scenes . After all, the ‘Illuminati’ pyramid-with-an-eye-on-it which appears on dollar bills was pinched off Martin Luther by the esoteric protestants under England’s Queen Elizabeth the First, hence its shadowy undertones. Cliquiness is uncharacteristically intrinsic to psychedelic experience. From the in-crowds at Euleusis and the Platonic Academy through to Esalen and the 21st century Tyringham Initiative , to the “it’s only us tripping” bond between pre-acceptance users and the current impulse to put a gatekeeper on ‘shamanism’. Students are undertaking ‘Diversity, Inclusion and Cultural Competence Tutoring’ as part of Vital. In the interests of silence being violence, I don’t feel it’s inappropriate for me to experience shame – the actually uncomfortable, ‘only way out is through’ kind – having enjoyed many benefits of multicultural society, let alone colonialism, with none of the drawbacks the people of colour around me faced. You don’t have to agree with that. And if it helps the Vital student body feel safer with, and closer to, each other then it’s a monster I’ll enthusiastically “Dive into the pupil of” as Dr Richards puts it. So far this actually seems like it has worked. Which is fantastic. “For many of us, intellectualisation is our primary form of armouring” I do try, in my white way, to engage friends in this conversation. They’ll certainly speak about their racial experience in the UK, and sometimes painfully in that deadpan way that makes the aside so much more shocking. But their tales are personal, because it’s a personal conversation. These valuable monologues end with “You know me, Steve, I’m not going to give you the narrative,” which is exactly the sort of thing I’d bloody say. Squirming on my part has been met at least once by satisfied laughter and V-signs. This fragile white man will not be given closure via his intellectualised debate, and is sobered instead by the serene sort of first hand testimony that the righteous deliver so gracefully. Vital brought in next-gen ‘Diversity, Inclusion and Cultural Competence Tutoring’. The lead facilitator was novellist and psychologist Ayize Jama-Everett. He wrote The Entropy of Bones an existential martial arts novel, so had me at that. If you’re reading this Ayize we can nerd out on all this any time here’s my email . Jama-Everett was keen to distance the programme from what we know as ‘diversity training’. His team’s approach is founded in work around differing, unsaid approaches amongst multicultural communities, which is actually necessary and courageous work. Obviously there are differences in the American conversation – nobody in US race training mentions the excesses of the Raj, for example. Very few British people of colour descended from slaves; instead they emigrated to post-war Britain, brimming with optimism, to find a war-ravaged, poverty-stricken, tired and grey country that offered little welcome and sometimes outright hostility. I actually do think that Western society is ‘institutionally racist’ (again you don’t have to agree) and was a bit embarrassed to find out that the approach wasn’t widely accepted. On the flip, I also think that the cultural competence movement would benefit from communicating using less academic language. Dancing, playing sport and making love together I believe is the best way to begin healing the divides. But even spending meaningful, intimate time together is unlikely to confront the most difficult aspects of the matter. So I commend Jama-Everett for taking it on while admitting the drawbacks of the process, and gladly reward his bravery by taking part despite it involving a challenging experience for myself. I can’t image doing it on acid would be fun. But that’s exactly the context. Now. Nicholas Spiers , a British expert on western interaction with indigenous Amazonian peoples also headed up a lecture alongside talismanic thought leader Bia Labate . During a thorough truth-bombing about facile Western framing of Mazatec beliefs he pointed out that Marina Sabina , the shaman banker and mushroom pioneer Gordon Wasson brought to international recognition with his landmark Life mag feature in the 1960s, had her house burned down by her neighbours for attracting too much police attention to the tradition. She died isolated and poor. Today her image is abused to market tourist traps. Hardly part of any mystery school, or renaissance. Read more and donate to Bia Labte’s Chacruna charity , intellectualise with Chacruna’s Psychedelic Justice: Toward a Diverse and Equitable Psychedelic Culture or rock this ‘Decolonise Your Mind’ T-shirt at your next gentrified neighbourhood BBQ.88:T470b,Observations from my study on Vital and recent happenings in the space Celia Vasquez Yui, ‘The Council of the Mother Spirits’ via Salon 94 and Shipibo Conibo Centre In Vital’s second lecture Dr Joe Tafur blew minds with a clinical overview of shamanic plant medicine healing. It included his staggering current research into conditions possibly related to epigentics that range from PTSD to cancer. The family doctor from Phoenix, Arizona is also a shaman in the Shipibo curanderismo tradition trained by Maestro Ayahuasca Shaman Ricardo Amaringo. He’s the author of ayahuasca blockbuster The Fellowship of the River (‘with introduction by Gabor Mat´é’) plus the co-founder alongside Amaringo of Nihue Rao healing centre near Iquitos, Peru. In the Zine this week, arranged in the Vital cirriculum’s colour scheme: Approach: Saving souls for three million years Therapy: The art of healing Space: Sing your song in the key of life Medical: Epigentic disease and plant medicine I n t e g ra l: Th e E agle and the Con dor Plus! Graph of the Week and second hand books Approach Saving lost souls for three million years. Now, with MDMA Graciela Arias Salazar, ‘La Virgen del Capinurí out of @centro_selva_arte_y_ciencia via Antricion gallery in Zurich Dr Tafur saw ayahuasca’s positive effect on beleagured veterans. He took this as a validation of his own conversion to plant medicine after ayahuasca was instrumental in his recovery from a depressive episode. He told Vital students that transcendent unconditional love, of the kind received in a sacred ceremony, has a positive effect on psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) just like family love (the good enough kind). It can be transmitted via ‘limbic resonance’ – a theoretical term for hormonal interaction between one or more people. With its support our subconscious processes difficult emotions more efficiently. The healing effect moves from the psyche (P) through the nerous system (N) into the immune system (I), bolstering the body’s own intuitive ‘inner healer’. The importance of empathy has recently been recognised within western medical treatment. But we are all understanding that professional clinicians can only give so much of themselves. However. Try instead exotic ceremonies, remarkable locations, skilled practicioners, devout participants, and zealous dedication in the form of the ‘only was out is through’ strategy of taking high-strength ancient jungle acid five nights in a row – and you have the missing element required to treat a range of psychoneuroimmunologically-related conditions currently frustrating doctors and destroying families. The spiritual sector, to its eternal credit, provides the social role of offering salvation to those mired in confusion, or paralysed by ethical quagmire. It can provide rare complex moral reconciliation, of the kind that PTSD treatment benefits from enormously. Where though does MDMA come in? It’s an ‘empathogen’ as opposed to a psychedelic. Nonetheless the ‘love drug’ too can augment some characteristics of psychotherapy just like psychedelics and traditional healing ceremonies. Not only does MDMA increase the level of limbic resonance between doctor and patient, it’s also been shown to activate areas of the brain used during childhood to ingrain healthy social behaviour patterns. Besides, “The MAPS PTSD programme going up for FDA-approval has a mystical element,” sa Dr Tafur, responding to my disbelief that western psychotherapy can rapidly replicate the awe of ayahuasca, “in my experience the clinical sector is increasingly intertested in ceremony. There are some really open-hearted therapists at MAPS,” he expands, referencing the completely accepting nature of spiritual fulfilment… historically known as ecstasy. Therapy Psychedelic therapy is an art first and a science second Anderson Debernardi, ‘Ayahuasqueros Healing’ available here “It’s living in the jungle for four months, eating right,” says Tafur, “You can’t read it and write it.” You can train to be a shaman with Dr Joe! But there’s what would be considered, in this modern world, a catch: you actually have to go and do it. Even for psychotherapits practicing MDMA therapy at MAPS, Dr Tafur points out, “There’s no running away when you’re in there with people who have these issues for eight hours.” Whether delivering the icaros in that delightful yet dread-laden way, or deftly reaching out with your neuroceptive aura , Dr Tafur is keen to stress, “this is an art.” A powerful combination of the sacred, the empathic, and experience in healing epigentic-related conditions is central to his hypothesis (see Medical below). It’s why the clincial sector is fascinated; even in this 1950s archive footage a researcher asks his test subject “how does your soul feel right now?” Plus it’s also why ravers aren’t cured of mental health issues after a big weekend – context and other important characteristics are key to the drug experience having a self-healing element. The spiritual factor prompts an ever deeper form of self-healing when combined with the therapeutic. “Current medical science cannot match the transpersonal, or the moving,” says Dr Tafur. ‘Psyche’ in classical greek means ‘soul’. Dr Tafur explained that indigenous perspectives consider spirituality and healing to be one and the same. Music, prayer, ceremony, connection and affirmation: all augment the ‘spiritual experience’ that research shows is key to healing with psychedelics. Space Songs in the key of life: energy and entropy Irene Lopez, ‘Fantastic Guest’ works available via her site Mystic healing is far from an established vocation in the West. And the spectre of cultural appropriation casts a deep shadow. The western neoshamanism AKA core shamanism movement has gone through its highs and lows since explorers came across ayahuasca in the 1800s. But there’s a gulf between Instagram ‘shamans’ and the type of grassroots work conducted for example in communities affected by the opioid crisis, where very well-intentioned and ultimately effective healers face risks of incarceration and rupturing their own community relations. How then can mystical healing’s beneficial elements be adopted by western health and wellbeing practicioners? Apprenticing under an authentic expert would likely involve the path taken by, for example, Reiki healers who are also encouraged to search and wait for the correct master, and may need to prove their dedication upon finding them. “It’s about real people and some real conenction that you might have,” says Dr Tafur, “What opportunities do you have around you? Where are you? Is there somebody in your area where you can explore that?” There are nonetheless fundamentals to the approach that can be considered. MAPS training assets for example refer to the importance of the therapist exuding ‘loving presence’. And somatic experiencing (which Dr Tafur recommends) coaches are trained to cultivate a ‘ neuroceptive aura ’ radiating a sense of safety to encourage ‘ interoception ’ a constructive dialogue between the body, emotions, and conscious thought. “We’re trying to help somebody, and using our faculties as human beings in order to do that,” is what Dr Tafur distills the healing process down to. During his lecture he was hardly dismissive of authentic western efforts to replicate the process – but it’s essential that these are conducted with an ‘open heart’. Singing icaros-type songs with substituted words in a shared language is not misguided… as long as it creates the required atmosphere for a mystical healing window to open. Sincerity of feeling is essential, but localised interpretations may be actually more effective than exotic traditional ones. The most graceful nuances of ayahuasca are said to be ontologically lost on outsiders. Occultist Jason Louv points out that eastern spiritual systems like buddhism are guides to living well in different cultures. In response to social media claims that ‘Putin should take ayahuasca’ to end the Ukraine conflict, Shaur-trained shaman and former financier John Perkins recently pointed out that the experience is traditionally believed to make fiercer warriors to highlight how we can’t overlap a different approach entirely onto our own worldview. Tactics specific to western society may have more impact on local patients, if conducted with the same levels of intention, craft and sensitivity. The “energy” to quote Dr Tafur directly is what is key – its purity of purpose and its intensity. Icaros have an improvised element and he himself will substitute spanish or english words if required. Nonetheless the language has a vocabulary that is ideal to express the ayahuasca experience, as does the rhythm – but this itself features aspects that might well go over the heads of anyone who can’t claim lineage in the local society and culture. Equally any expert will tell you that it is best to learn an established system before beginning to develop your own. Dr Tafur feels that his traditional Shipibo education gives his practice, “A strong base. But I’m interested in singing for patients undergoing ketamine therapy for example. So there’s room to mix it up. But there must be a reason why. Is it because it’s better for your patients or just because you don’t like tradition? Learning something well, then applying it elsewhere is more powerful than just coming up with whatever.” Europeans have been feverishly dreaming up a shamanic culture using both fact and myth for the past few centuries, resulting in for example Wicca. They have also looked to the future in the form of ‘ chaos magic ’, a method of creating personal spiritual systems based on esoteric techniques passed down the millennia. Even a traditional ‘christian mysticism’ featuring, for example alchemy is in vogue now thanks to writer Damien Echols. All this will still be a massive culture shock for the average agnostic westerner seeking alternative healthcare, especially hipsters raised on Richard Dawkins (who also has his place). But often the psychedelically-active patient will have become curious about these areas allowing for fundamentals to be touched upon at least. In 2015’s Transcendent Mind (see bottom of page) published by the famously orthodox American Psychological Association, Drs Imants Baruss and Julia Mossbridge present serious, rubber-stamped research that pairs ancestor worship with the collective unconscious and (I paraphrase) ‘that way you know your parents are about to call just before the phone rings.’ Refer to that last bit and riff from there… To end. Experts like Dr Ido Cohen point out that the shamanic path is a calling as opposed to a blessing. Like other (supposedly) rewarding life paths, it comes with its own trials and sacrifices. Dr Tafur says, “if this makes you feel special, like you’re right and others are wrong, it’s not working. It’s suppsoed to make you feel part of something, working together.” Medical Spiritual healing could help cure epigentic diseases and transform treatment Plant medicine fan favourite Pablo Amringo “Ultimately we’re reopening metaphysics. The research is in review now and we’re looking forward to sharing it with the world,” says Dr Tafur. Modern Spirit , Dr Tafur’s non-profit org has collected genetic samples from some of the 107 patients in MAPS’ 12-month MDMA therapy trial (see above) where a stunning 68% of patients had statistically recovered from chronic, treatment resistant PTSD after three treatments. They’d been suffering for an average of 17.8 years. “To a doctor, the sacred isn’t important. But to close your mind is a hiding place. People need to see something. Mental health? It’s competitive. But cancer is largely epigenetic and that’s one of the fields they’re saying they want to put more energy and understanding into.” The research could also validate other holistic practices ranging from somatic experiencing to reiki. “Ultimately we’re reopening metaphysics. The research is in review now and we’re looking forward to sharing it with the world,” he says. He recounts a pivotal moment in his shamanic career, when ayauasca visions insisted that a penitent’s disease was “on” as opposed to “in” her genes as medical consenus assumes. This tallys with the compelling field of epigenetics, which examines changes in our DNA (nature) brought about by environment (nurture). These can be passed down the generations, and include traumatic experiences. This was proven by landmark surveys using data assembled from descendants of Holocaust survivors. Of course it also works for colonialism, industrialised warfare, poverty, patriarchy and lovelessness. It’s a new and complex but far from fringe area: my mother is an identical twin who has been taking part in NHS epigentic research funded by good old Wellcome Trust for decades. I n t e g ra l Th e E agle and the Con dor By Fellowship of the River cover artist Rai Weni ‘The Eagle and the Condor’ is a two thousand year-old propehcy that could be said to predict the colonisation of the Americas, the resulting cultural holocaust, and a re-emergence of mystical healing techniques. The peoples of the Condor – indigeneous Americans – and the Eagle, western colonisers – will finally come together ushering a new paradigm of enlightenment. Columbus’ First Voyage landed in the Carribbean in 1492. Syncronicity fans note that in 1994 Terrence McKenna published Food of the Gods and Dr Allan Schore released Affect Regulation and the Origin of the Self. The aforementioned Shuar shaman John Perkins has alluded to the propehcy as prompting a shift from the West’s ‘Death Economy’ based on competiting over limited resources to a ‘Life Economy’ where wellbeing is paramount (in our abundant era, the Death Economy is arguably so past its due that its basis in scarcity has even had to be simulated by, for example, western governments implementing policies to artificially raise house prices). This prophecy is not uncomparable to Western astrology’s Age of Aquarius (which both Carl Jung in Aion and Aleister Crowley with his ‘Age of Horus’ suggested will have a non-dual flipside, but that is for another day). The prophecy offers the very seductive idea of ‘Pachakuti’ a time of reconciliation and healing. But is it real? “Who knows what’s real?” says Dr Tafur, when talking about ‘entity’ encounters’ and other sublime ingredients of the mystic experience, “we’re dealing with a mystery and we have to discern. Be careful with anything, no matter what, because things can be tricky in those spaces. The medicine itself is not trying to trick us. If there is light, and positive healing spirit, it’s clear. But if there’s any doubt, there’s no doubt – just wait. And don’t worry that you’re missing out, because you’re learning what could be good for you and what isn’t.” It is your journey, and there are no clear answers. “Respecting your space is important, and these things should respect you too,” he says, “but this isn’t the sort of thing that can be learned on the internet. It’s messy and there’s room for projection and confusion.” Enforce boundaries as you should outside of DMT hyperspace. “Hearing ‘is it real?’ from the other end gets kind of boring after a while,” says Dr Tafur. Whether ‘entities’, or prophecies, or indeed ‘limbic resonance’ are facts is to miss the point. Instead, ask – what are the feelings? And are they benefitting us? Kool-Aid Corner To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph of the Week Attribution of consciousness to living and non-living entities before and after a psychedelic belief-changing experience After psychedelic experience Before psychedelic experience From: A Single Belief-Changing Psychedelic Experience Is Associated With Increased Attribution of Consciousness to Living and Non-living Entities (supplementary material) by Samdeep M Nayak and Roland R. Griffiths, John Hopkins University (2022) My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only This week: Transcendent Mind by Imants Barrus and Julia Mossbridge. Swept on for £50 when I noticed prices were going up quickly £52 at April 2022, £75 by early May 2022 Despite what the sort of thing I write in my day job would have you believe, government-backed public education openly invests in paranormal research (for better or worse). It even issues press releases about the positive findings. Here in the UK Northampton University is the crucible of not-so-forbidden learning, with parapsychological research taking place across several departments. Published in 2015 by the notoriously conservative American Psychological Association Transcendent Mind contains an enthusiastic review of official investigations into consciousness, the soul, supra-physical existence and the cosmic whole. Drs Julia Mossbridge and Imants Baruss , a former engineering scholar who quit to work as a roofer before taking up psychology, are heavy-hitters in the field. You may also enjoy Alterations of Consciousness: An Empirical Analysis for Social Scientists . Next issue: Ancient Greece and the Mysteries of Eueleusis This blog is not affiliated to Vital beyond my study on the course. The content shouldn’t be taken as representative as it’s a personal reflection and includes my own lived experience of the sector too. Psychedelic substances are prohibited in the UK, other countries and most US states. I do not condone their use nor am I evangelising for, or recommending them to you. There are more qualified people you can turn to in the Resources section but if you are considering psychedelic treatments the best person to speak to is probably your own therapist, counsellor, or doctor. Related reading Vital Study Zine Week One: The Ground Zero of LSD Research Kool-Aid Corner #389:T96c,Mark rewilding Mark Leib is a contemporary geomancer and biodesigner. He uses the ancient tradition of sacred geomtery to create structures, spaces, settings and sensations in the now. "The planet can heal and sustain us like a plant can, whether that’s in the Amazon or a field close by," Mark says. Hear more from him, and all about his stone circle building workshops near Glastonbury, England in my first broadcast below. A geomancer (left) talking down the astralabe Mark’s an award-winning restaurant and nightclub designer. He gave up throwing shapes to master them instead and trained in the arch-discipline of traditional master building for ten years. The almost-forgotten art kept pace with civilisation in this part of the world from the Egyptian empire if not before, and was used to raise pyramids, temples and cathedrals. It’s also one of those antediluvian innovations that somehow spread across the globe – Mark points out that seed fossils have been found atop South American pyramids, where farmers left their fledgling crops to harness bio-energies. Sacred shuteye Among many techniques it includes building in harmony with the energy fields of natural objects nearby. So like “Chinese medicine for the construction industry” and “feng shui for the encvironment.” He’s currently the only traditional master builder in Britain and one of only a handful in the world. But their ranks are swelling as people turn to holistic solutions for habitat and health. Futurists too are frothing at the mouth at ‘bio-architecture’ examples like these Buckminster Fuller-style concept domes by BioArc. BioArc’s dome habitats Mark began fusing his ancient and modern skills in projects ranging from modern menhirs to integration tactics. And amateur megalith masons are in luck, because Marks’s hosting a workshop near Glastonbury, England on Sunday 8 May 2022. Soul Sanctuary’s site near Glastonbury Particpants will build a stone circle together and learn the fundamentals of sacred geometry. Enjoy a day in the countryside, maybe bust out a ritual later on If you’re up for it get in touch with Gibby from Soul Sanctuary via gibby74@sky.com . The treatment can be applied to mandala and labyrinth designs too No going too fast as per usual, I don’t want to hear about anyone burning out after whacking up a pyramid in their back garden . Mark’s website: www.markleib.com8a:Tbf0,My unofficial Vital Study Zine #4 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space ‘Bacchus’ by Caravaggio at The Uffizi, Florence Consciousness expansion: from cave painting, to the pyramids, and the first Psych Symposium at London’s National Gallery. How far have we got? In week three Vital students heard from Dr Lenny Gibson, a clinical psychologist, philosopher and breathwork pioneer with ‘50 years of experience working with non-ordinary states of consciousness’ who nonetheless fitted in a storied career and founded transpersonal psychology non-profit Dreamshadow . Gibson’s winsome and poingnant presentation elegantly examined western attitudes towards conscious thinking. His key point was that the world beyond words is no less valid – more so, even – than what we can describe. Psychedelics connect us with our intuition: as represented by the ancient gods Cerrunos and Baal, the greek god Dionysus (Bacchus to the romans) and, yes, Jesus of Arimathea who ‘turns the water into wine’. The first art, storytelling and culture derived from rites around this divine archetype. Gibson references philosopher du jour Iain McGhilchrist , and I’ll pull out this particular quote from the Matter with Things author: “As soon as you start saying anything about this realm, you falsify it. There are certain things that simply are resistant to normal language, normal exposition. But don’t for that reason not exist.” But he began with a comparison to the Baka tribes whose genetics diverged 70,000 years ago. They describe their ceremonial group singing as “so beautiful the self melts away” just like both psychedelics and the ‘ecstatic’ techniques the rest of us have taken just as long to work out using science instead. In the Zine this week, arranged in the synaesthesic schema used for Vital’s curriculum : Approach: Move any mountain with neoshamanism Therapy: ‘Celebrating the mysteries’ is the new euphemism of choice Space: Can you hold your own? Medical: The Microdose Age I n t e g r a l : Le ar nin g t o fl y Plus! Graph of the Week and second hand books These five items I pulled from the week’s research are themed along Vital’s natural element-themed structure. Air provides an overview of psychedelic use, Fire concerns therapeutic applications, Water covers ‘space holding’ – the art of keeping it together, Earth is where you’ll find medical matters, and E t h e r discusses integration, the process of bringing psychedelic power into regular life . Click straight through to your pet subject below. Approach Move any mountain with neo shamanism Therapy ‘Celebrating the mysteries’ is the new euphemism of choice Space Can you hold your own? Medical The Microdose Age I n t e g r a l Rising from the ashes of God, a new mythology Kool-Aid Corner To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Next issue: Dr Rick ‘Spirit Molecule’ Strassman spares no set or setting in his evalutation of the space right now8b:T932,Approach LSD is a promethean invention that has democratised the sacrament, and given humankind the ability to heal itself says Dr Gibson A neo shaman The S-word, problematic from the start, is getting ever more laden. No surprise, when you consider that the criteria for shaman-hood range, depending on your understanding, from genetic lineage, grave dedication, and fighting spirits to cure treatment resistant diseases all the way to a dubious certificate, some bongos and an Instagram account. ‘Neo shamanism’ to Gibson is humankind’s recent ability to be his own wise counsel and medicine woman. The synthesis of LSD, a colourless tasteless substance able to inspire psychedelic states in minuscule amounts, he believes has democratised the role. Poetically, this most scientific of revelations has inspired a rebirth of personal spirituality and philosophic examination. Scholars will point out that it’s the first time in 500 years, a la Joe Tafur’s Legend of the Eagle and the Condor , that science and religion have conjoined, whether in the form of transpersonal psychologist Stanislav Grof or the discoveries of quantum physics. “For once, and for everyone, the truth was not still a mystery. Love called to all” Mystical healing may be associated with the Shipibo curanderos but they don’t use the word shaman themselves. In many communities associated with ‘shamanism’ the healer role itself is rare, considered apart, and special. Scientific medical training is not uncommon amongst indegeneous mystical healers. Personally I understand exactly why usage is revered and not to be bandied about, certainly in an “I can cure you by battling with entities” manner. Gibson’s own understanding is that the neo shaman is a contemporary voyager into the new frontiers of the ‘Psyche,’ itself the name for the Greek goddess of wisdom and the soul. Obvious candidates for 20th Century LSD neo-shamanhood might be Grof, Aldous Huxley, Amanda Fielding or Jimi Hendrix. And Timothy Leary, who was scolded by RD Laing for democratising LSD… But if LSD had remained the preserve of the elite, Hendrix might never have wrote in his personal poetry after Woodstock in 1969, “For once, and for everyone, the truth was not still a mystery. Love called to all.” Mankind’s destiny calls, and we are all ordained to answer.8c:Ta31,Therapy The inner healer remains the preserve of the elite but its gatekeepers look ever more ridiculous Above and below: kylix cup depicting Hades and Persephone from 430BC now in The British Museum Accessibility is a hot topic in ‘the space’ right now. As ever. At the inaugural Psych Symposium in London’s National Gallery earlier this May 2022, itself undeniably elitist at £400 for a basic one-day ticket and £1,000 for full access and the drinkies, MAPS spokesperson Natalie Lyla Ginsberg told suits that “PTSD is most common in the marginalised communities who cannot currently access these treatments.” Author Zoe Cormier eviscerated corpos with lines like, “So if it’s okay for somebody dying of bowel cancer to grow their own mushrooms, why is it not okay for normal folks?” (Answer: ‘because dosages’, to a lack of any audible groans). The Greeks famously all tripped together at the Eleusinian Mysteries, an invite-only annual bash held at the festival of Demeter for the best part of two thousand years. It’s heavily referenced in Shakespeare’s esoteric play The Tempest . Supposedly ‘The Mysteries’ was reserved only for the ‘invisible college’ wyrd and wonderful types, but high society were in on things too: “The beautiful people following the interesting people, and the rich people follow the beautiful people” as a wise lady once told me. Indeed, the use of psychedelics was only proven recently when a gruelling, decades-long investigation into the local availability of psychedelic ergot was trumped by legal records prosecuting a notorious socialite for ‘celebrating the mysteries’ at dinner parties back home in Athens (he got exiled to Sparta, by the way). Current podcast staple Brian Muraresku will tell you all about psychedelic use by the early Christians. And has been recently in great interviews like this around his book The Immortality Key . The ancient greeks believed “Life can only be experienced in a truly terrifying, but transformational, encounter with death.” Ritually, the Greeks supped from elaborate kylix cups (above). Medieval witches got rampant on datura, best taken internally via the mucus membrane, by inserting it vaginally – ‘riding the broomstick’. In 2022 ketamine bumps are delivered in £5,000 inhalers, and while no one is sticking DMT up their bum just yet, the common folk are hunted and persecuted by the agents of mediocrity still. Related reading Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill W’s LSD use inspired 12-Step and cured his depression Psychedelic therapy is an art first and a science second8d:T7e4,Space In psychedelic therapy as any other, you have to take responsibility for your own mental health Kelsey Brookes, LSD Poster, available here The Imperial College testing rooms are the most British thing I’ve ever seen . There’s a blanket thrown over the studio kitchen in the corner, a drape with some trees on and a lamp stuck behind it, plus some spiritual tat. It does look surprisingly cosy nonetheless, especially with Dr Ros beaming angelically from her seat in the corner. But you almost certainly have to dream the Albion way to appreciate its understated succour. Bar the open heartedness oozing from the ever-radiant Dr Ros, being served the Mysteries by the priestesses of Demeter it is not. Neither is donning a blindfold plus headphones, and boasting a grin like the one that betrays the fact you don’t normally fly business class, an experience surely at all comparable to the jungle ayahuasca one. 12-step style integration and ceremony – my bad, ‘celebrating the mysteries’ – circles were mentioned as future possibilities by Psych delegates in a huddle with Imperial College trials participants Iain Roullier and Leonie Schneider, unsung heroes of the UK space who also spoke onstage with Dr Ros repping their PsyPan set-up. In the meantime there is… an app . “The substance is only 51% of the process” ‘Holding space’ doesn’t seem to have been much of an issue during contemporary scientific tests and education regarding bad trips-stroke-challenging, purgatorial experiences may take the edge off them so to speak. Admittedly a guide, let alone a skilled psychotherapist or shaman, may be good for a bad trip too. Because surely MindMed’s ‘off switch’ jab is cheating*. An old pal has just reminded me that our sitter was a table leg with an acid house smiley face drawn on it which we kept in the back of the van. The Wild Hunt rides. *Take the off switch if they offer it or at least don’t say I told you not to Related reading Learning to fly The Microdose Age8e:T908,Medical LSD’s versatility is wildly underestimated say thought leaders Beckley Psytech Lady Amanda Fielding of The Beckley Foundation and now Beckley Psytech “Microdosing is a step forward for humankind.” Beckley Psytech’s Lady Amanda Fielding (for it is she) declared so at Psych Symposium. If psychedelics can be for the everyman, can they be for every day? While it’s less spectacular than ‘spiritual doses’, DMT, or ayahuasca, and an ongoing science to say the least, microdosing’s arguably taken a stronger foothold in popular culture than the next-level psychedelics. Users report similar effects to integrated major experiences, like enthusiasm, geniality, consideration and walking in the woods while listening to Jon Hopkins. Famously though microdosing – which Beckley are researching throughly – is one of the few contemporary psychedelic phenomena to fail the placebo test. Small doses are being tested on some conditions: MindMed are on stage two for 20µg of LSD twice a week, while sticking someone in a room and giving them a proper tab (200µg) did okay for GAD . The likes of New Health Club are poised to bring acid to the workplace (at last). Lenny Gibson’s observation was that ‘psyche’ also means ‘breath’, and Stanislav Grof’s holotropic breathwork could be the only option – and also a better one – for many. Professor David Nutt pointed out in his Psych presentation that it’s the ‘wellbeing’ scores that are really impressive in psychedelic therapy’s efficacy results. But according to a neuroscientist I spoke to outside when the fire alarm went off, “there are no criteria for developing drugs for ‘wellbeing’ like there might be for mental health conditions already treated pharmacologically. So everybody’s trying to make drugs, which is ruinously expensive as it is, without knowing precisely what to aim at, certainly in terms of approval.” The Mushroom Nation is at once already here, and still so far away. NB Psychedelics are prohibited in most places even if labelled ‘cacao’ and sent in gaudy packaging. You can still get busted for them like this guy . Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment8f:Te31,In te gr at io n Is there more to integration than walking in the woods while listening to John Hopkins ? ‘Hyperbolic Depth’ by Wolfe Von Lenkiewicz available here “The substance is only 51% of the treatment” said Imperial College PsiloDep 2 trial clinical lead scientist Dr Rosalind Watts at Psych Symposium 2022. It was vehemently echoed by the PsyPan patient support group alongside her on stage at London’s National Gallery. Blasting off into hyperspace is not entirely the point either reminded week four Vital lecturer Dr Lenny Gibson, who evoked Stanislav Grof: “The ecstasy of a noumenal moment, a psychedelic intoxication, is not enough for mysticism. Such a moment comes to nothing if it does not become part of a process of lived expression and expressed thinking.” Less than a week previously Dr Ros launched her Acer Integration project at the Earth Centre in Hackney. It’d take a heart of stone not to give the team at Acer credit and I, for one, liked the singing in the round. The mystic is sorely lacking in European research as Dr David Luke points out, and metropolitan Londoners, their dopamine receptors worn down to ichorous stubs, are polarised in their spiritual awakening or total lack thereof. I suspect it might be better for many if we stick to burning massive effigies and people just ‘get it’ on either a collective unconscious level or whatever. Meanwhile the stock images of millennials in the blindfold and headphones are beginning to look sinister, I reckon. Once again I find myself drawn to the intriguingly complex MAPS PTSD therapy programme, where the mystical concepts so potent for healing trauma must be dealt with ever so sensitively, because the soldiers have been driven far further from God than even my neighbours in this modern-day Babylon (I like London really; non-dual thinking). “Be kind to the guy at the grocery store. Make new friends. Put the art pedal to the floor.” While veterans and the treatment-resistant depressed crave healing – and should go to the front of the queue – the rest of us scrabble for meaning, humanity, or merely playfulness. Nonplussed yet fascinated by doxa, Plato’s term for shallow concerns, we struggle to ‘participate in eternal totality’ as Spinoza urged. Raves, ‘sex positivity’ and Burning Man-type festivals are our attempts to break through. And ‘meaning making experiences’ may indeed prompt a breakthrough or two, but that will only be the start of a long and confusing journey for some. Others, like us BJJ bores and Dragon’s Den/Shark Tank wannabees, ponder our lack of the right kind of trauma, that sweet spot sought by Neitzsche , Jung, and others who rarely left their desks. The greeks did put down their books. Even Plato excelled at wrestling, competing at the Pytheon (like The Championship in English football) and Isthmian games. Both of which featured culture and sport combined incidentally. Immortality Key writer Brian Muraresku says in this great Lex Fridman interview that the greeks were also fond of saying, “Life can only be experienced in a truly terrifying, but transformational, encounter with death.” He quotes Huxley on mass radical self-transcendence and deeper understanding. Plus Alan Watts on authority being threatened by mass outbreaks of mysticism. Myth, or ontology if you like, in the West and far beyond teaches that less thought is better than more. Lenny Gibson’s lifestyle advice: “Be kind to the guy at the grocery store. Make new friends. Put the art pedal to the floor.” Related reading Architecture is the trippiest job The Eagle and the Condor90:T5e2,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph of the Week Ego-dissolution scores of test subjects On DMT Placebo From: DMT Models the Near-Death Experience, Christopher Timmermann, Leor Roseman, Luke Williams, David Erritzoe, Charlotte Martial, Héléna Cassol, Steven Laureys, David Nutt and Robin Carhart-Harris (Frontiers in Psychology, August 2018) My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only This week: Listen, Little Man! by Wilhelm Reich with illustrations by William Steig £6 once 60p What flirtation with western neo shamanism would be complete without a reminder that the boy who points out the emperor has no clothes is actually banished to the wilderness? It’s only in the modern version he becomes king. Other innovator-pranksters like Reich, and Plato’s favourite Socrates, end up dead. Reich never intended for this 1945 manifesto to be published. This 1977 version features incredible illustrations by William Steig, who’d go on to write Shrek . Reichian bodywork is part of helotropic breathing and bioenergetics is taught in schools. It’s more relevant than ever for detoxifying western armouring, but undoubtedly too much like hard work for most. Homemade orgone accumulators at the ready for a pssible comeback nonetheless. Buy my teacher’s new book on Reichian Character Structure to get going, it’s brilliant. Next issue: John Hopkins’ Dr Bill Richards talks 60 years of LSD91:T6e3,My unofficial Vital Student Zine #2 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space. Celia Vasquez Yui, ‘The Council of the Mother Spirits’ via Salon 94 and Shipibo Conibo Centre In Vital’s second lecture Dr Joe Tafur blew minds with a clinical overview of shamanic plant medicine healing. It included his staggering current research into conditions possibly related to epigenetics that range from PTSD to cancer. The family doctor from Phoenix, Arizona is also a shaman in the Shipibo curanderismo tradition trained by Maestro Ayahuasca Shaman Ricardo Amaringo. He’s the author of ayahuasca blockbuster The Fellowship of the River (‘with introduction by Gabor Mat´é’) plus the co-founder alongside Amaringo of Nihue Rao healing centre near Iquitos, Peru. In the Zine this week, arranged in the Vital curriculum colour scheme: Approach: Saving souls for three million years. And now with MDMA Therapy: Psychedelic therapy is an art first and a science second Space Holding: Songs in the key of life: energy and entropy Medical: Public opinion counted a lot back then in things like pharmaceutical intervention. It still does I n t e g r a l: The Eagle and the Condor These five items I pulled from the week’s research are themed along Vital’s natural element-themed structure. Air provides an overview of psychedelic use, Fire concerns therapeutic applications, Water covers ‘space holding’ – the art of keeping it together, Earth is where you’ll find medical matters, and E t h e r discusses integration, the process of bringing psychedelic power into regular life . Click straight through to your pet subject below. Next issue: consciousness expansion from cave painting to the 2022 Psych Symposium92:Tb07,Approach Could the love drug offer salvation to the lost? Graciela Arias Salazar, ‘La Virgen del Capinurí out of @centro_selva_arte_y_ciencia via Antricion gallery in Zurich Dr Tafur saw ayahuasca’s positive effect on beleaguered veterans. He took this as a validation of his own conversion to plant medicine after ayahuasca was instrumental in his recovery from a depressive episode. He told Vital students that transcendent unconditional love, of the kind received in a sacred ceremony, has a positive effect on psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) just like family love (the good enough kind). It can be transmitted via ‘limbic resonance’ – a theoretical term for hormonal interaction between one or more people. With its support our subconscious processes difficult emotions more efficiently. The healing effect moves from the psyche (P) through the nervous system (N) into the immune system (I), bolstering the body’s own intuitive ‘inner healer’. The importance of empathy has recently been recognised within western medical treatment. But we are all understanding that professional clinicians can only give so much of themselves. However. Try instead exotic ceremonies, remarkable locations, skilled practitioner , devout participants, and zealous dedication in the form of the ‘only was out is through’ strategy of taking high-strength ancient jungle acid five nights in a row – and you have the missing element required to treat a range of psychoneuroimmunologically-related conditions currently frustrating doctors and destroying families. The spiritual sector, to its eternal credit, provides the social role of offering salvation to those mired in confusion, or paralysed by ethical quagmire. It can provide rare complex moral reconciliation, of the kind that PTSD treatment benefits from enormously. Where though does MDMA come in? It’s an ‘empathogen’ as opposed to a psychedelic. Nonetheless the ‘love drug’ too can augment some characteristics of psychotherapy just like psychedelics and traditional healing ceremonies. Not only does MDMA increase the level of limbic resonance between doctor and patient, it’s also been shown to activate areas of the brain used during childhood to ingrain healthy social behaviour patterns. Besides, “The MAPS PTSD programme going up for FDA-approval has a mystical element,” says Dr Tafur, responding to my disbelief that western psychotherapy can rapidly replicate the awe of ayahuasca, “in my experience the clinical sector is increasingly interested in ceremony. There are some really open-hearted therapists at MAPS,” he expands, referencing the completely accepting nature of spiritual fulfilment… historically known as ecstasy. Related reading Are ‘corporadelics’ doing enough for set, setting… and society? Kool-Aid Corner93:T786,Therapy You can train as a shaman with Dr Joe! But there’s a catch. You actually have to go and do it Anderson Debernardi, ‘Ayahuasqueros Healing’ available here “It’s living in the jungle for four months, eating right,” says Tafur, “You can’t read it and write it.” You can train to be a shaman with Dr Joe! But there’s what would be considered, in this modern world, a catch: you actually have to go and do it. Even for psychotherapists practicing MDMA therapy at MAPS, Dr Tafur points out, “There’s no running away when you’re in there with people who have these issues for eight hours.” Whether delivering the icaros in that delightful yet dread-laden way, or deftly reaching out with your neuroceptive aura , Dr Tafur is keen to stress, “this is an art.” A powerful combination of the sacred, the empathic, and experience in healing epigentic-related conditions is central to his hypothesis (see Medical below). It’s why the clinical sector is fascinated; even in this 1950s archive footage a researcher asks his test subject “how does your soul feel right now?” Plus it’s also why ravers aren’t cured of mental health issues after a big weekend – context and other important characteristics are key to the drug experience having a self-healing element. The spiritual factor prompts an ever deeper form of self-healing when combined with the therapeutic. “Current medical science cannot match the transpersonal, or the moving,” says Dr Tafur. ‘Psyche’ in classical greek means ‘soul’. Dr Tafur explained that indigenous perspectives consider spirituality and healing to be one and the same. Music, prayer, ceremony, connection and affirmation: all augment the ‘spiritual experience’ that research shows is key to healing with psychedelics. Related reading Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill W’s LSD use inspired 12-Step and cured his depression Kool-Aid Corner94:T173f,Space Mystic healing is far from an established profession in the West. And cultural appropriation casts a deep shadow Irene Lopez, ‘Fantastic Guest’ works available via her site The western neoshamanism AKA core shamanism movement has gone through its highs and lows since explorers came across ayahuasca in the 1800s. But there’s a gulf between Instagram ‘shamans’ and the type of grassroots work conducted for example in communities affected by the opioid crisis, where very well-intentioned and ultimately effective healers face risks of incarceration and rupturing their own community relations. “We’re trying to help somebody, and using our faculties as human beings in order to do that” How then can mystical healing’s beneficial elements be adopted by western health and wellbeing practitioners? Apprenticing under an authentic expert would likely involve the path taken by, for example, Reiki healers who are also encouraged to search and wait for the correct master, and may need to prove their dedication upon finding them. “It’s about real people and some real connection that you might have,” says Dr Tafur, “What opportunities do you have around you? Where are you? Is there somebody in your area where you can explore that?” There are nonetheless fundamentals to the approach that can be considered. MAPS training assets for example refer to the importance of the therapist exuding ‘loving presence’. And somatic experiencing (which Dr Tafur recommends) coaches are trained to cultivate a ‘ neuroceptive aura ’ radiating a sense of safety to encourage ‘ interoception ’ a constructive dialogue between the body, emotions, and conscious thought. “We’re trying to help somebody, and using our faculties as human beings in order to do that,” is what Dr Tafur distills the healing process down to. During his lecture he was hardly dismissive of authentic western efforts to replicate the process – but it’s essential that these are conducted with an ‘open heart’. Singing icaros -type songs with substituted words in a shared language is not misguided… as long as it creates the required atmosphere for a mystical healing window to open. Sincerity of feeling is essential, but localised interpretations may be actually more effective than exotic traditional ones. “Learning something well, then applying it elsewhere is more powerful than just coming up with whatever” The most graceful nuances of ayahuasca are said to be ontologically lost on outsiders. Occultist Jason Louv points out that eastern spiritual systems like buddhism are guides to living well in different cultures. In response to social media claims that ‘Putin should take ayahuasca’ to end the Ukraine conflict, Shaur-trained shaman and former financier John Perkins recently pointed out that the experience is traditionally believed to make fiercer warriors to highlight how we can’t overlap a different approach entirely onto our own worldview. Tactics specific to western society may have more impact on local patients, if conducted with the same levels of intention, craft and sensitivity. The “energy” to quote Dr Tafur directly is what is key – its purity of purpose and its intensity. Icaros have an improvised element and he himself will substitute Spanish or English words if required. Nonetheless the language has a vocabulary that is ideal to express the ayahuasca experience, as does the rhythm – but this itself features aspects that might well go over the heads of anyone who can’t claim lineage in the local society and culture. Equally any expert will tell you that it is best to learn an established system before beginning to develop your own. Dr Tafur feels that his traditional Shipibo education gives his practice, “A strong base. But I’m interested in singing for patients undergoing ketamine therapy for example. So there’s room to mix it up. But there must be a reason why. Is it because it’s better for your patients or just because you don’t like tradition? Learning something well, then applying it elsewhere is more powerful than just coming up with whatever.” Europeans have been feverishly dreaming up a shamanic culture using both fact and myth for the past few centuries, resulting in for example Wicca. They have also looked to the future in the form of ‘ chaos magic ’, a method of creating personal spiritual systems based on esoteric techniques passed down the millennia. Even a traditional ‘christian mysticism’ featuring, for example alchemy is in vogue now thanks to writer Damien Echols. “If this makes you feel special, like you’re right and others are wrong, it’s not working. It’s supposed to make you feel part of something, working together” All this will still be a massive culture shock for the average agnostic westerner seeking alternative healthcare, especially hipsters raised on Richard Dawkins (who also has his place). But often the psychedelically-active patient will have become curious about these areas allowing for fundamentals to be touched upon at least. In 2015’s Transcendent Mind (see bottom of page) published by the famously orthodox American Psychological Association, Drs Imants Baruss and Julia Mossbridge present serious, rubber-stamped research that pairs ancestor worship with the collective unconscious and (I paraphrase) ‘that way you know your parents are about to call just before the phone rings.’ Refer to that last bit and riff from there… To end. Experts like Dr Ido Cohen point out that the shamanic path is a calling as opposed to a blessing. Like other (supposedly) rewarding life paths, it comes with its own trials and sacrifices. Dr Tafur says, “if this makes you feel special, like you’re right and others are wrong, it’s not working. It’s supposed to make you feel part of something, working together.” Related reading Kool-Aid Corner The Eagle and the Condor95:Ta70,Medical “Ultimately we’re reopening metaphysics. The research is in review now and we’re looking forward to sharing it with the world,” says Dr Tafur Plant medicine fan favourite Pablo Amringo Dr Tafur believes that mystical experiences can help cure epigenetic diseases from PTSD to psoriasis… and maybe even the Big C. Modern Spirit , Dr Tafur’s non-profit org has collected genetic samples from some of the 107 patients in MAPS’ 12-month MDMA therapy trial (see above) where a stunning 68% of patients had statistically recovered from chronic, treatment resistant PTSD after three treatments. They’d been suffering for an average of 17.8 years. “To a doctor, the sacred isn’t important. But to close your mind is a hiding place. People need to see something. Mental health? It’s competitive. But cancer is largely epigenetic and that’s one of the fields they’re saying they want to put more energy and understanding into.” The research could also validate other holistic practices ranging from somatic experiencing to reiki. “Ultimately we’re reopening metaphysics. The research is in review now and we’re looking forward to sharing it with the world,” he says. He recounts a pivotal moment in his shamanic career, when ayahuasca visions insisted that a penitent’s disease was “on” as opposed to “in” her genes as medical consensus assumes. This tall with the compelling field of epigenetics, which examines changes in our DNA (nature) brought about by environment (nurture). These can be passed down the generations, and include traumatic experiences. This was proven by landmark surveys using data assembled from descendants of Holocaust survivors. Of course it also works for colonialism, industrialised warfare, poverty, patriarchy and lovelessness. It’s a new and complex but far from fringe area: my mother is an identical twin who has been taking part in NHS epigenetic research funded by good old Wellcome Trust for decades. This blog is not affiliated to Vital beyond my study on the course. The content shouldn’t be taken as representative as it’s a personal reflection and includes my own lived experience of the sector too. Psychedelic substances are prohibited in the UK, other countries and most US states. I do not condone their use, neither am I evangelising for, or recommending them to you. There are more qualified people you can turn to in the Resources section but if you are considering psychedelic treatments the best person to speak to is probably your own therapist, counsellor, or doctor. Related reading Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does. Kool-Aid Corner96:Tbf3,In te gr at io n The E agle and the Con dor is a two thousand year old prophecy predicting unification of the American people By Fellowship of the River cover artist Rai Weni The propehcy that could be said to predict the colonisation of the Americas, the resulting cultural holocaust, and a re-emergence of mystical healing techniques. The peoples of the Condor – indigeneous Americans – and the Eagle, western colonisers – will finally come together ushering a new paradigm of enlightenment. Columbus’ First Voyage landed in the Carribbean in 1492. Syncronicity fans note that in 1994 Terrence McKenna published Food of the Gods and Dr Allan Schore released Affect Regulation and the Origin of the Self. “Be careful with anything, no matter what, because things can be tricky in those spaces. The medicine itself is not trying to trick us. If there is light, and positive healing spirit, it’s clear” The aforementioned Shuar shaman John Perkins has alluded to the propehcy as prompting a shift from the West’s ‘Death Economy’ based on competiting over limited resources to a ‘Life Economy’ where wellbeing is paramount (in our abundant era, the Death Economy is arguably so past its due that its basis in scarcity has even had to be simulated by, for example, western governments implementing policies to artificially raise house prices). This prophecy is not uncomparable to Western astrology’s Age of Aquarius (which both Carl Jung in Aion and Aleister Crowley with his ‘Age of Horus’ suggested will have a non-dual flipside, but that is for another day). “Hearing ‘is it real?’ from the other end gets kind of boring after a while” The prophecy offers the very seductive idea of ‘Pachakuti’ a time of reconciliation and healing. But is it real? “Who knows what’s real?” says Dr Tafur, when talking about ‘entity’ encounters’ and other sublime ingredients of the mystic experience, “we’re dealing with a mystery and we have to discern. Be careful with anything, no matter what, because things can be tricky in those spaces. The medicine itself is not trying to trick us. If there is light, and positive healing spirit, it’s clear. But if there’s any doubt, there’s no doubt – just wait. And don’t worry that you’re missing out, because you’re learning what could be good for you and what isn’t.” It is your journey, and there are no clear answers. “Respecting your space is important, and these things should respect you too,” he says, “but this isn’t the sort of thing that can be learned on the internet. It’s messy and there’s room for projection and confusion.” Enforce boundaries as you should outside of DMT hyperspace. “Hearing ‘is it real?’ from the other end gets kind of boring after a while,” says Dr Tafur. Whether ‘entities’, or prophecies, or indeed ‘limbic resonance’ are facts is to miss the point. Instead, ask – what are the feelings? And are they benefitting us? Related reading Architecture is the trippiest job Kool-Aid Corner97:T6ea,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Ask Savia Droid about reincarnation Graph of the Week Attribution of consciousness to living and non-living entities before and after a psychedelic belief-changing experience After psychedelic experience Before psychedelic experience From: A Single Belief-Changing Psychedelic Experience Is Associated With Increased Attribution of Consciousness to Living and Non-living Entities (supplementary material) by Samdeep M Nayak and Roland R. Griffiths, John Hopkins University (2022) My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only This week: Transcendent Mind by Imants Barrus and Julia Mossbridge. Swept on for £50 when I noticed prices were going up quickly £52 at April 2022, £75 by early May 2022 Despite what the sort of thing I write in my day job would have you believe, government-backed public education openly invests in paranormal research (for better or worse). It even issues press releases about the positive findings. Here in the UK Northampton University is the crucible of not-so-forbidden learning, with parapsychological research taking place across several departments. Published in 2015 by the notoriously conservative American Psychological Association Transcendent Mind contains an enthusiastic review of official investigations into consciousness, the soul, supra-physical existence and the cosmic whole. Drs Julia Mossbridge and Imants Baruss , a former engineering scholar who quit to work as a roofer before taking up psychology, are heavy-hitters in the field. You may also enjoy Alterations of Consciousness: An Empirical Analysis for Social Scientists . Next issue: Ancient Greece and the Mysteries of Eleusis98:T39f2,Observations from my study on Vital and recent happenings in the space Humphry Osmond attends a peyote ceremony in 1956 Historian Dr Erika Dyck lectured on the “ground zero of LSD research,” conducted by Humphry Osmond and Abram Hoffer at Weyburn Asylum in remote Saskatchewan beginning in 1951. Osmond, a British expat, was observing Native American peyote ceremonies by 1956. A year later he coined the term ‘psychedelic’ in his correspondence with Aldous Huxley. Hoffer trailblazed nutritional approaches like fasting and vitamin treatments. I studied history at university (specialising in Renaissance Florence and the Medici, cheers) so Vital’s inaugural week lay seductively inside my comfort zone. I seized the opportunity to go down a historical rabbit hole… and this zine is longer than future weekly updates will be. Stay locked for bonus history posts out of all the feverishly downloaded PDFs. Dr Dyck recently published graphic novel Wonder Drug: LSD in the Land of Living Skies , Psychedelic Psychiatry: LSD on the Canadian Prairies and Psychedelic Prophets: The Letters of Aldous Huxley and Humphry Osmond . The latter she painstakingly assembled from private collections and museums alongside a team of volunteers. She’s identified the first woman to take LSD, Albert Hoffman’s assistant Susi Ramstein Weber – who also served as spontaneous sitter on Albert’s first two trips. Dr Dyck is a key contributor to The Chacruna Institute of Psychedelic Plant Medicines , an organization founded by Brazilian anthropologist Dr. Bia Labate ‘promoting a bridge between “traditional ceremonial use” and clinical and therapeutic settings.’ You can watch her regular lecture on Psychedelic History in Canada on YouTube, plus I thoroughly recommend What about Mrs Psychedelic? And a bunch more I put on this YouTube resource channel. These five items I pulled from the week’s research are themed along Vital’s natural element-themed structure: Air: Historical and Current Approaches Fire: Psychedelic Therapies Water: Spaceholding and Navigating Earth: Medical and Clinical E t h e r : Integration Plus! Stay on the dancefloor till the end for Graph of the Week and second hand book porn Approach Is ‘corporadelics’ doing enough for spirit, set, setting… and society? A powerful spirit healing experience taking place in Newcastle, England The early days of LSD research are easily vilified. Spirituality is a dirty word in scientific circles right now: let alone reincarnation or astrology, both of which Stanislav Grof is quick to mention . It’s even considered unprofessional for the healer to develop a connection with the patient. 20th century Western scientists are easily cast cast as distant, privileged figures electro-shocking schizophrenics behind the asylum gates, collaborating with the CIA in return for research permits. And now the spectre of ‘corporadelics’ hangs over LSD’s renaissance. I asked Dr Dyck what she learned about human nature from her research, that we can apply to the present. ”There’s a risk of reducing history to a cliché to push against,” she responded “or seeing history as ‘they had it wrong and in the past and we’re better now’.” “However there’s still something that we can take from the spirit, the optimism, the motivation, the intentions,” says Dyck, “for example, a lot of people who went into these trials were designated as patients – but came through feeling they were collaborators. It pushes back against the competing model of engaging in scientific rigour, where methodology overwhelmed the need for investigating human behaviour in a more diverse way.” Osmond, Hoffer and their in-house architect Kyoshi Yazumi (more of whom below) were revamping Canada’s mental health system as part of an ambitious pledge by Canada’s new socialist government. Their innovations included day trips outside the famously forboding asylum for inpatients, art and music therapy, and family visits, plus more autonomy for the nurses… who took LSD to ‘empathise better with the patient exprience’. “The early researchers definitely were trying to align a health access point within a publicly funded system,” she responded, “That is certainly not on the horizon today. We see lots of competing, profit-seeking ways of turning psychedelics into something that, I would argue, are going to be less accessible.” Therapy Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill ‘W’ Wilson’s psychedelic use inspired Twleve-step and cured his depression Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill Wilson was forced to stand down from his pro-LSD stance Hospitalised three times already in less than two years during the mid-30s, Wilson checked himself into hospital for rehab bearing a copy of William James’ Varieties of Religious Experience. He was given the Towns-Lambert treatment for detoxification made using deadly nightshade, henbane (both lively natural psychedelics) and morphine over a period of days. A close converted christian friend and recovery fellow, Ebby, visited, and pressed the conversation towards Wilson’s atrocious treatment of his wife Lois. Wilson hit ‘rock bottom’ – ego death – smiled up at Kali, and, as he writes in autobiography Pass it On : “Then came the blazing thought, ‘you are a free man!’ A great peace stole over me, and this was accompanied by a sensation difficult to describe. I became acutely conscious of a Presence which seemed like a veritable sea of living spirit. I lay on the shores of a new world. ‘This’, I thought, ‘must be the great reality.” Wilson also experienced visions of “a chain of drunks” extending around the globe, assisting each others’ recovery. This would become Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). Wilson also came to value spirituality, and etched its practice into The Twelve Steps. According to his I am Bill biographer Francis Hartigan, Wilson thought depression grew from a “lack of faith” and a dearth of “spiritual achievement.” Vitally, he “did not see any conflict between science and medicine and religion.” Thanks to Osmond’s work, church and community leaders were (at this stage) pro-LSD, having seen Osmond’s patients rejoin functional society. Wilson met Osmond and Hoffer in his role as an abstinence thought leader to discuss addicition in 1954. At this stage our favourite post-war sub-arctic boffins were blundering around believing LSD would prompt delerium tremens attacks that might shock drinkers out of their rut. Osmond: “We found, in fact, that this wasn’t quite how it worked… not unlike Bill’s experience. It gave us pause for thought. Not on the grounds of how terrifying it was, but how illuminating it was.” In 1955 Wilson took LSD under supervision from consciousness pioneer Gerald Heard and psychiatrist Sidney Cohen (who also provided Aldous Huxley’s deathbed LSD). He wrote to Betty Eisner, one of his therapy team plus an especially innovative researcher into addiction and LSD, reporting: “Since returning home I have felt — and hope have acted! — exceedingly well. I can make no doubt that the Eisner-Cohen-Powers-LSD therapy has contributed not a little to this happier state of affairs.” AA’s narrative was that it healed through a combination of complete sobriety and the ‘higher power’ (the latter Wilson considered contactable via LSD). Psychedelics and even psychology didn’t fit with that. To fervent AA members, “Bill’s seeking outside help was tantamount to saying the program didn’t work” writes Hardigan. In 2020, a systematic review published by Frontiers in Psychology compiling figures from alcoholism LSD treatments over many decades said, “LSD is revealed as a potential therapeutic agent in psychiatry; the evidence to date is strongest for the use of LSD in the treatment of alcoholism.” John Hopkins stand-out Matthew Johnson began trials on psilocybin for smoking cessation in 2014, and has since racked up an 80% success rate that dwarfs other approaches. His team are also starting or planning studies using psilocybin therapy for a wide range of other conditions, including opioid addiction and alcoholism. Bill ‘W’ Wilson caved into pressure and stopped LSD therapy in the mid-60s. Neither his depression nor drinking returned. Space Women invented chill out DJing I couldn’t find a picture of Rose Hoffer, Hermina Browne or Helen Bonny in the 1950s so please settle for Delia Derbyshire making one of the earliest and greatest pieces of electronic music in 1962 And their style remains the template for chill out mixes – plus MAPS therapy sessions – today. After Abram Hoffer’s wife Rose soothed a tripping patient by changing a jarring record to an elegant Bach number, she was thenceforth delegated I/C the tunes. Hermina E Browne , director of music therapy at New Jersey State Hospital, began testing music for effectiveness during psychedelic sessions for alcoholics in 1956. Her major innovations were to divide the soundtrack into five thirty-minute parts plus – I love this one – put the music on for half an hour, then turn it off again for the same time . Her playlist categories were: 1 Relaxing to tense 2 Very tense, disturbed with a purpose 3 Solemn, meditative, self-searching, spiritual 4 Relaxing, spiritual 5 Reconciling, restoration of confidence, feeling of hope and faith Browne passed her findings on to E Thayer Gaston, ‘The Father of Music Therapy’ who eschewed her policy of ‘Five Moods Projected’. Instead he insisted on music ‘familiar’ to the patient. (The handbook says have them ask to change it once, stand ground gently, then cave in if they ask again). Enter during the 1970s Helen Bonny , who considered music ‘intersubjectively verifiable’ and set out to prove it. Her Maryland Hospital is noted for using four therapists in psychedelic sessions, always including a music therapist. Bonny’s unpublished research did so, but she’s even better known for conceiving Guided Imagery and Music , the leading form of music therapy in the prsent day. Medical Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does Poison Dyck’s presentation began with a curved ball. She pointed out that pharmaceuticals were bang on-trend during the 1950s after the successful roll-out of anti-psychotic chlorpromazine (Thorazine). This generated goodwill for tests on more ‘wonder drugs’. However, in the early1960s the startling effects of thalidomide on pregnancy came to light. “Images of deformed children caused outcry and a moral panic over testing ethics,” plus the emerging anti-modernity movement fuelled a backlash that brought LSD – brand name ‘Delysid’ – testing to a halt in Canada by 1962. Leary was fired from Harvard in April 1962. Research was legal elsewhere, but funding and support rapidly became non-existent. Integral Architecture is the trippiest job Kiyoshi Azumi built six ‘ideal mental hospitals’ Architects Henrik Bull and Erik Clough wrote chapters for Ralph Metzner’s The Ecstatic Adventure . They took part in noted creativity and problem-solving exercises under the influence of LSD during the 1960s. Architecture has arguably become the trade most closely associated with psychedelic self-improvement since. The first modern-day architect to get turned on though was Kiyoshi ‘Kiyo’ Azumi . Commissioned to revamp Canada’s asylum buildings by Osmond and Hoffer, you can probably guess what happened after they met in 1956 under the proviso of ‘learning how the patients perceive their environment.’ A long friendship developed: the first ‘ideal mental hospital’ in Yorktown, Saskatchewan was opened in 1965, another five were built in Canada, and a further in Pensylvannia USA. Izumi’s book LSD and Architecture specifies the following conclusions: 1 Provide as much privacy as possible 2 Minimize ambiguity of architecture’s design and detail 3 Bear no intimidating features 4 Foster spatial interactions that curtail the frequency and intensity of undesirable confrontations Izumi passed away in 1996, and Weyburn was demolished in 2009. Kool-Aid Corner To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph of the Week The relationship between ego-dissolution and ego-inflation for experiences occasioned by: Classical psychedelics Coacine Alcohol From: Ego-Dissolution and Psychedelics: Validation of the Ego-Dissolution Inventory (EDI) by Matthew M Nour, Lisa Evans, David Nutt and Robin L Carhart-Harris (2016) My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: Albion Dreaming by Andy Roberts. Replaced after my first copy accompanied a close friend to his new life in NY Snapped up for just over UK£25, copy for sale via GF Books in Hawthorn, CA for just over US$1000, UK price £95 and up From the first chapter: ‘William Blake drew on Albion as a symbol of man before the Biblical fall and historian Peter Ackroyd has used the term for the title of his book charting the origins of the English imagination. From the Sixties onwards sections of the counter culture used the term Albion to refer to their vision of a land, society and individual consciousness based on the insights offered by LSD. Thus, Albion embodies the mythological imagination of these Isles, a state akin to the aboriginal Dreamtime, to which everyone should have access. This, then, is Albion’s dreaming.’ Andy Roberts is Britain’s answer to Erika Dyck; our national chronicler of the far out. Psychedelic Renaissance author AWAKN’s Dr Ben Sessa says: “Andy is an anti-authoritarian, free-thinking individual who has happily nailed his colours to the weirdness mast without being lost in its sea of ethereal fluffiness.” Indeed he’s unafraid of toppling sacred cows, like in this forensic inquisition into the Francis Crick LSD-DNA connection and his biography of disruptive-at-best prankster Michael Hollingshead. Grab his recent collection of essays from Psychedelic Press and see vids on the New Psychonaut YouTube depository. Next issue: Dr Joe Tafur explains traditional and modern indigeneous perspectives This blog is not affiliated to Vital beyond my study on the course. The content shouldn’t be taken as representative as it’s a personal reflection and includes my own lived experience of the sector too. Psychedelic substances are prohibited in the UK, other countries and most US states. I do not condone their use, neither am I evangelising for, or recommending them to you. There are more qualified people you can turn to in the Resources section but if you are considering psychedelic treatments the best person to speak to is probably your own therapist, counsellor, or doctor.99:Tbde,My unofficial Vital Study Zine #1 with observations from Vital Psychedelic Training and recent happenings in the space Humphry Osmond attends a peyote ceremony in 1956 ‘The first lady of LSD history’ lectured on the progressive, pioneering research of Humphry Osmond – inventor of the word ‘psychedelic’ – and Abram Hoffer in remote Saskatchewan from 1951. Osmond, a British expat, was observing Native American peyote ceremonies by 1956. A year later he coined the term ‘psychedelic’ in his correspondence with Aldous Huxley. Hoffer trailblazed nutritional approaches like fasting and vitamin treatments. I studied history at university (specialising in Renaissance Florence and the Medici, cheers) so Vital’s inaugural week lay seductively inside my comfort zone. I seized the opportunity to go down a historical rabbit hole… and this zine is longer than future weekly updates will be. Stay locked for bonus history posts out of all the feverishly downloaded PDFs. Dr Dyck recently published graphic novel Wonder Drug: LSD in the Land of Living Skies , Psychedelic Psychiatry: LSD on the Canadian Prairies and Psychedelic Prophets: The Letters of Aldous Huxley and Humphry Osmond . The latter she painstakingly assembled from private collections and museums alongside a team of volunteers. She’s identified the first woman to take LSD, Albert Hoffman’s assistant Susi Ramstein Weber – who also served as spontaneous sitter on Albert’s first two trips. Dr Dyck is a key contributor to The Chacruna Institute of Psychedelic Plant Medicines , an organisation founded by Brazilian anthropologist Dr. Bia Labate ‘promoting a bridge between “traditional ceremonial use” and clinical and therapeutic settings.’ You can watch her regular lecture on Psychedelic History in Canada on YouTube, plus I thoroughly recommend What about Mrs Psychedelic? And a bunch more I put on this YouTube resource channel. These five items I pulled from the week’s research are themed along Vital’s natural element-themed structure. Air – ‘Approach’ – provides an overview of psychedelic use, Fire concerns therapeutic applications, Water covers ‘space holding’ – the art of keeping it together, Earth is where you’ll find medical matters, and E t h e r discusses integration, the process of bringing psychedelic power into regular life . Click straight through to your pet subject below or just go back a page. Approach: Are 21st Century ‘corporadelics’ doing enough for spirit, set, setting… and society? Therapy: Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill W saw 12-step in a psychedelic vision and cured his depression with LSD Space: Women Invented chill-out DJing Medical: Public opinion counted a lot back then in things like pharmaceutical intervention. It still does I n t e g r a l: Original architect tripper ‘Kiyo’ A zum i w a s a co r e mem b e r o f th e W e y b u rn te a m and tr ipp ed with the nurses Kool-Aid Corner: To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life9a:Ta2e,Approach Osmond and the early researchers stressed the importance of aesthetics and the divine to LSD therapy. Are those elements sorely lacking down at your local ketamine clinic? A powerful spirit healing experience taking place in Newcastle, England During the Q&A session after Vital’s first lecture I asked Dr Dyck what she learned about human nature from her research, that we can apply to the present. ”There’s a risk of reducing history to a cliché to push against,” she responded “or seeing history as ‘they had it wrong and in the past and we’re better now’.” The early days of LSD research are easily vilified. Spirituality is a dirty word in scientific circles right now: let alone reincarnation or astrology, both of which Stanislav Grof is quick to mention . It’s even considered unprofessional for the healer to develop a connection with the patient. 20th century Western scientists are easily cast cast as distant, privileged figures electro-shocking schizophrenics behind the asylum gates, collaborating with the CIA in return for research permits. And now the spectre of ‘corporadelics’ hangs over LSD’s renaissance. “We see lots of competing, profit-seeking ways of turning psychedelics into something that, I would argue, are going to be less accessible” “However there’s still something that we can take from the spirit, the optimism, the motivation, the intentions of these early Western researchers,” says Dyck, “for example, a lot of people who went into these trials were designated as patients – but came through feeling they were collaborators. It pushes back against the competing model of engaging in scientific rigour, where methodology overwhelmed the need for investigating human behaviour in a more diverse way.” Osmond, Hoffer and their in-house architect Kyoshi Yazumi (more of whom below) were revamping Canada’s mental health system as part of an ambitious pledge by Canada’s new socialist government. Innovations included day trips outside the famously foreboding asylum for inpatients, art and music therapy, and family visits, plus more autonomy for the nurses… who took LSD to ‘empathise better with the patient experience’. “The early researchers definitely were trying to align a health access point within a publicly funded system,” she responded, “That is certainly not on the horizon today. We see lots of competing, profit-seeking ways of turning psychedelics into something that, I would argue, are going to be less accessible.” Related reading Kool-Aid Corner #1 Architecture is the trippiest job9b:T1037,Therapy LSD treatment is most effective against the demon drink, says a 2020 report. But AA founder Bill ‘W’ was ahead of the curve back in the 1950s Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill Wilson was forced to stand down from his pro-LSD stance Hospitalised three times already in less than two years during the mid-30s, Bill ‘W’ Wilson checked himself into hospital for rehab bearing a copy of William James’ Varieties of Religious Experience. He was given the Towns-Lambert treatment for detoxification made using deadly nightshade, henbane (both lively natural psychedelics) and morphine over a period of days. A close converted christian friend and recovery fellow, Ebby, visited, and pressed the conversation towards Wilson’s atrocious treatment of his wife Lois. Wilson hit ‘rock bottom’ – ego death – and, as he writes in autobiography Pass it On : “Then came the blazing thought, ‘you are a free man!’ A great peace stole over me, and this was accompanied by a sensation difficult to describe. I became acutely conscious of a Presence which seemed like a veritable sea of living spirit. I lay on the shores of a new world. ‘This’, I thought, ‘must be the great reality.” “LSD therapy has contributed not a little to this happier state of affairs” Wilson also experienced visions of “a chain of drunks” extending around the globe, assisting each others’ recovery. This would become Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). Wilson also came to value spirituality, and etched its practice into The Twelve Steps. According to his I am Bill biographer Francis Hartigan, Wilson thought depression grew from a “lack of faith” and a dearth of “spiritual achievement.” Vitally, he “did not see any conflict between science and medicine and religion.” Thanks to Osmond’s work, church and community leaders were (at this stage) pro-LSD, having seen Osmond’s patients rejoin functional society. Wilson met Osmond and Hoffer in his role as an abstinence thought leader to discuss addiction in 1954. At this stage our favourite post-war sub-arctic boffins were blundering around believing LSD would prompt delerium tremens attacks that might shock drinkers out of their rut. Osmond: “We found, in fact, that this wasn’t quite how it worked… not unlike Bill’s experience. It gave us pause for thought. Not on the grounds of how terrifying it was, but how illuminating it was.” In 1955 Wilson took LSD under supervision from consciousness pioneer Gerald Heard and psychiatrist Sidney Cohen (who also provided Aldous Huxley’s deathbed LSD). He wrote to Betty Eisner, one of his therapy team plus an especially innovative researcher into addiction and LSD, reporting: “Since returning home I have felt — and hope have acted! — exceedingly well. I can make no doubt that the Eisner-Cohen-Powers-LSD therapy has contributed not a little to this happier state of affairs.” AA’s narrative was that it healed through a combination of complete sobriety and the ‘higher power’ (the latter Wilson considered contactable via LSD). Psychedelics and even psychology didn’t fit with that. To fervent AA members, “Bill’s seeking outside help was tantamount to saying the program didn’t work” writes Hardigan. “This,” 12-step founder Wilson thought, “must be the great reality” In 2020, a systematic review published by Frontiers in Psychology compiling figures from alcoholism LSD treatments over many decades said, “LSD is revealed as a potential therapeutic agent in psychiatry; the evidence to date is strongest for the use of LSD in the treatment of alcoholism.” John Hopkins stand-out Matthew Johnson began trials on psilocybin for smoking cessation in 2014, and has since racked up an 80% success rate that dwarfs other approaches. His team are also starting or planning studies using psilocybin therapy for a wide range of other conditions, including opioid addiction and alcoholism. Bill ‘W’ Wilson caved into pressure and stopped LSD therapy in the mid-60s. Neither his depression nor drinking returned. Related reading Kool-Aid Corner #1 Architecture is the trippiest job9c:T8f8,Space Abram Hoffer’s wife Rose was in charge of the tunes during Humphrey Osmond’s 1950s tests I couldn’t find a picture of Rose Hoffer, Hermina Browne or Helen Bonny in the 1950s so please settle for Delia Derbyshire making one of the earliest and greatest pieces of electronic music in 1962 When 50s LSD researcher Abram Hoffer’s wife Rose soothed a tripping patient by changing a jarring record to an elegant Bach number, she was henceforth delegated I/C the tunes.  Testing music for effectiveness began in 1956 under Hermina E Browne , director of music therapy at New Jersey State Hospital during psychedelic sessions for alcoholics. Browne’s major innovations were to divide the soundtrack into five thirty-minute parts plus – I love this one – put the music on for half an hour, then turn it off again for the same time . Browne’s playlist categories were: 1 Relaxing to tense 2 Very tense, disturbed with a purpose 3 Solemn, meditative, self-searching, spiritual 4 Relaxing, spiritual 5 Reconciling, restoration of confidence, feeling of hope and faith Browne passed her findings on to E Thayer Gaston, ‘The Father of Music Therapy’ who eschewed her policy of ‘Five Moods Projected’. Instead he insisted on music ‘familiar’ to the patient. (The Fadiman handbook suggests the first time voyagers ask to change the music, stand your ground gently, then cave in if they ask again). Hermina Browne’s innovation was to put the music on for half an hour, then turn it off again for another thirty minutes Later during the 1970s Helen Bonny considered music ‘intersubjectively verifiable’ and set out to prove it. Her Maryland Hospital is noted for using four therapists in psychedelic sessions, always including a music specialist. Bonny’s unpublished research demonstrated certain universal qualities, but she’s even better known for conceiving Guided Imagery and Music , the leading form of music therapy in the present day. The soundtrack curated by women for early LSD test remains the template for chill out mixes – plus Johns Hopkins University ( its seven-hour playlist here ) and MAPS therapy sessions – today. Unless you prefer the 2020’s foremost psychedelic tunestress DJ Bus Replacement Service . Doris Woo AKA DJ Bus Replacement Service9d:T5b7,In te gr at io n ‘Kiyo’ A zum i w a s a co r e mem b e r o f th e W e y b u rn t e a m and tr ipp ed with the nurses Kiyoshi Azumi built six ‘ideal mental hospitals’ Architects Henrik Bull and Erik Clough wrote chapters for Ralph Metzner’s The Ecstatic Adventure . They took part in noted creativity and problem-solving exercises under the influence of LSD during the 1960s. Architecture has arguably become the trade most closely associated with psychedelic self-improvement since. The first modern-day architect to get turned on though was Kiyoshi ‘Kiyo’ Azumi . Commissioned to revamp Canada’s asylum buildings by Osmond and Hoffer, you can probably guess what happened after they met in 1956 under the proviso of ‘learning how the patients perceive their environment.’ A long friendship developed: the first ‘ideal mental hospital’ in Yorktown, Saskatchewan was opened in 1965, another five were built in Canada, and a further in Pennsylvania USA. Izumi’s book LSD and Architecture specifies the following conclusions: 1 Provide as much privacy as possible. 2 Minimise ambiguity of architecture’s design and detail. 3 Bear no intimidating features. 4 Foster spatial interactions that curtail the frequency and intensity of undesirable confrontations. More here . Izumi passed away in 1996, and Weyburn was demolished in 2009. Related reading Kool-Aid Corner #1 Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does.9e:T7f8,To finish: trippy clippings, merry pranks, and psychedelic student life Graph of the Week The relationship between ego-dissolution and ego-inflation for experiences occasioned by: Classical psychedelics Coacine Alcohol From: Ego-Dissolution and Psychedelics: Validation of the Ego-Dissolution Inventory (EDI) by Matthew M Nour, Lisa Evans, David Nutt and Robin L Carhart-Harris (2016) My bookshelf weighs a ton Notable new purchases for the occult library. Strictly second hand snap-ups only. This week: Albion Dreaming by Andy Roberts. Replaced after my first copy accompanied a close friend to his new life in NY Snapped up for just over UK£25, copy for sale via GF Books in Hawthorn, CA for just over US$1000, UK price £95+ From the first chapter: ‘William Blake drew on Albion as a symbol of man before the Biblical fall and historian Peter Ackroyd has used the term for the title of his book charting the origins of the English imagination. From the Sixties onwards sections of the counter culture used the term Albion to refer to their vision of a land, society and individual consciousness based on the insights offered by LSD. Thus, Albion embodies the mythological imagination of these Isles, a state akin to the aboriginal Dreamtime, to which everyone should have access. This, then, is Albion’s dreaming.’ Andy Roberts is Britain’s answer to Erika Dyck; our national chronicler of the far out. Psychedelic Renaissance author AWAKN’s Dr Ben Sessa says: “Andy is an anti-authoritarian, free-thinking individual who has happily nailed his colours to the weirdness mast without being lost in its sea of ethereal fluffiness.” Indeed he’s unafraid of toppling sacred cows, like in this forensic inquisition into the Francis Crick LSD-DNA connection and his biography of disruptive-at-best prankster Michael Hollingshead. Grab his recent collection of essays from Psychedelic Press and see vids on the New Psychonaut YouTube depository. Next issue : Dr Joe Tafur explains traditional and modern indigenous perspectives9f:T1494,‘The Living’ by Mat Eco, buy it here Doctors, psychiatric nurses, social workers and community leaders were clear on the urgent need for effective, easily available treatments during their personal introdcutions in the first Vital remote sessions. Dispatching from the frontline, they believed psychedelic medicine could be the answer. But they met cost and even time frustrations where available, and prohibition otherwise. “The mental health crisis is real” said a fellow student earlier this week highlighting a growing volume of patients in desperate need, and a healthcare sector under siege.  Currently available treatments, including those available at UK ketamine clinics are famously dear. Likewise an Amsterdam session or more exotic retreat. I’m a big believer in psychedelic medicine but for that money I’d prefer a hair transplant. Maybe that’s because I haven’t got major depressive disorder.  Lots of others do. In particular, the poor. An extensive  2020 report for MIT Economics cites that, internationally, ‘Rates of depression, anxiety, and suicide correlate negatively with income. Those with the lowest incomes in a community suffer one and a half to three times more frequently from depression, anxiety and other common mental illnesses.’ “We see competing, profit-seeking ways of turning psychedelics into something that are going to be less accessible” Dr Erica Dyck My ADHD meds are more effective than anti-depressants from what I can tell and I’m fortunate to have them. Lots of others don’t – and they’re in prison. The Justice Select Committee Inquiry into Mental Health in Prisons here in the UK were told recently in an expert witness report ‘An estimated 25% of prisoners have ADHD. Despite the disproportionate prevalence, ADHD remains critically under-diagnosed. Furthermore, there is insufficient commissioning of ADHD care pathways across the system.’ A 2010 report from Sweden registered 40% only two of whom had received diagnoses as children and went for a figure of ’40% of adult male longer-term prison inmates. Further, ADHD and coexisting disorders, such as substance use disorder, anti-social behaviour, personality disorders plus mood and anxiety disorders, severely affected prison inmates with ADHD. Nearly 80% of adults with ADHD, present with at least one coexisting psychiatric disorder.’ Depression and anxiety are indeed more achievable diagnoses, here in the UK for adults at least. When my ADHD was identified after the best part of fifty years, I was first prescribed Elvanse after a rigorous process by a noted expert, at significant expense. My National Health Service GP refused to take on the ‘shared care agreement’ that provides a subsidised prescription, and told me that the surgery he runs doesn’t deal with it at all.  ‘Primitive psychology has produced no methods for solving crime, conflict, alienation, prejudice, stupidity, boredom, aggression, unhappiness…’ Dr Timothy Leary Fortunately I found another doctor. Or I wouldn’t be able to afford it. Even though it’s essentially speed. While we’re on the subject my psychiatrist told me ketamine treatment was “expensive”, the only time I’ve heard him use the word.  Vital’s lecturer this week was Canadian historian Erica Dyck . Among her specialities is the early research of Abram Hoffer and Humphry Osmond, the British scientist who turned on Aldous Huxley and coined the term ‘psychedelic’. During the Q&A I asked her what she learned about human nature through her research. “The early researchers definitely were trying to align a health access point within a publicly funded system,” she responded, “That is certainly not on the horizon today. We see lots of competing, profit-seeking ways of turning psychedelics into something that, I would argue, are going to be less accessible.” ‘Keeping ADHD prisoners in jail costs the UK £74 million, but it’d only cost £30,000 to treat them’ Dr Phil Anderton, police oficer turned therapist Consciousness is policed by an old boys’ club with a mighty pen (if famously shit handwriting). The medical consensus-cum-caper fills its boots from patented versions of otherwise cheap chemicals, or narrative-approved, victim-blaming re-education sessions. Both of which continue to make it wealthy, at the considerable expense of the less fortunate. And the taxpayer. Keeping ADHD prisoners in jail costs the UK £74 million, but it’d only cost £30,000 to treat them. Dr Leary, who was once on a path to being the Sigmund Freud of his generation, in Exo-Psychology : “Primitive psychology, in spite of its enormous, state-supported bureaucracy and its priesthood mystique, has produced no verifiable theory for explaining human behaviour, nor any methods for solving the classic problems of human society: crime, conflict, alienation, prejudice, stupidity, boredom, aggression, unhappiness, and philosophic ignorance about the meaning of life.” Yet plant medicines remain forbidden, exclusive, or gate-kept by bureaucracy, ignorance, banality and greed. Even though they grow in the garden. And the healthcare workers we claim to value are insistent they can help address this mental health crisis, which is real.a0:Tf1f,Organised by Psychedelics Today , the course has healing at its core, but covers subjects ranging throughout the sector. Vital is a brand new course from the current leader in online psychedelic education for health professionals and the producers of the space’s number one podcast, Psychedelics Today . Its cirriculum features ‘training in the elements of psychedelic therapy and integration.’ For the uninitiated, ‘integration’ is the art of weaving an experience into regular life; holitsic philosophy and spirituality to consolidate the positive effects of a trip. Class begins tomorrow at the time of writing on Bicycle Day, the anniversary of Albert Hoffman’s first intentional LSD trip of 19 April 1943 . I’m writing this after the initial welcome Zoom. Turns out there are just under 130 of us students, gathered from the four corners of the globe. Actually, it was by far the most exotic Zoom I’ve been on. There was something of a moment when co-founder Kyle Buller asked us to chat-post where we were calling from, resulting in a a pan-global roll call. I opted for Vital’s programme because it struck me as intellectually robust, forward-facing and splendid value for money. Five modules cover: heritage, a snapshot of the contemporary sector, the assisted experience process itself, medical specifics, and the aforementioned integration. The training includes the acumen required to oversee and improve psychedelic sessions. That’s whether the intention is therapeutic, entheogenic spiritual trips, or in performance fields like problem solving. More basic background – this is known as ‘guiding’. ‘Guides’ don’t necessarily offer qualified psychotherapy in addition, although that’s far from unknown. Usually though specialist collaborators are recruited case by case as requested or required. Plus guides don’t ingest any hallucinogens themselves. They provide a fothold in reality for the ‘voyager’. This area of the course cirriculum draws on knowledge drawn from scientific experiments, diverse international tradition, and subcultures both reverent and recreational. Vital also provides an overview of the burgeoning industry as a whole. There’s a variety of preset mini-modules in related fields. Sure, Vital’s primarily aimed at doctors, therapists, counsellors and coaches wanting to get completely clued up… and who are in a position to monetise the skills straight away. But it also makes sense for any professionals working in the field or with aspirations thereto. Trainees get over 180 hours of live and assisted study, a private online community, a choice of six international retreats, access to umpteen hours of material, and more. A stellar line-up of live lecturers ranges from frontiersmen like John Hopkins’ Bill Richards and Rick ‘The Spirit Molecule’ Strassman to contemporary names such as AWAKN’s Ben Sessa, Numinus’ Devon Christie, and Imperial College Centre for Psychedelic Research’s David Luke. The faculty even includes psychologist Dick ‘Internal Family Systems’ Schwartz. Adele La France, Erika Dyck and Ido Cohen are among the compelling voices I’ve discovered during my initial skim of the faculty. To cap it all my study group tutor is Johanna Hilla from the Philosophy and Psychedelics Exeter Research Group , based in Britain’s West Country. (Where I grew up. Not exotic). Preorder its forthcoming edited essays now. Johanna wrote her master’s thesis on Carl Jung’s Red Book and lists ‘Western Esotericism’ as an interest in her official bio, which are exceptional characteristics in a teacher if you ask me. Now I must cram research module one, Psychedelic Therapies: Historical and Current Approaches. You can go straight through to Vital’s website for direct info on the course, refer to its online resources and not this site for specifics.a1:Te7a,‘Fade 2’ above is by Adam Neate and you can buy it here My name is Steve Langsford Beale. I’m a blatantly middle-aged British journalist who was diagnosed with adult ADHD in January 2021. The accompanying psychotherapy and medication has put life in sharp perspective, and prompted shifts in my mindset. At least that’s my current justification for enrolling in the first Vital Psychedelic Training course starting 19 April 2022. The programme will actually bring depth to my writing work in the areas that I wish to pursue in the future: not only psychology, spirituality, philosophy, performance and health but also alternative art, music and culture too. I’ll be blogging here but my focus, naturally, is on lived experience not staring at a personal device experience. I’ll cover my studies on the Vital course itself, and where possible developments in the psychedelic space, integration ideology, and the culture of consciousness expansion. I hope to fit in some interviews, immersive reports – what the suits call ‘Top Gear-style stunts’  – and enthusiastic, studenty hypothesising too. Moreover through Vital, I can explore my long-term aspirations to a healing or teaching practice of some description. To that end I’ve embarked on minor work experience, getting a vew on potential areas for development and/or catastrophe. Besides my ADHD ‘journey’ I have family experience of addicition. I’m taking this opportunity to tell anyone involved that I love them, I forgive them, and I hope they can forgive me. While I may drop some details from my own life on this blog, I won’t be discussing or divulging other people’s stories. This confidentiality applies to the students and teachers on the Vital course also; this website is not a ‘behind the scenes’ account of my time studying. Neither is it officially affiliated to Vital, nor should the content be taken as representative of the cirriculum as a whole. My background is lifestyle journalism, which isn’t the most transcendent arena. In the print era I enjoyed diverse roles, including fashion director of FHM , editor at large of The Face , and the dating columnist at Marie Claire . But I snatched opportunities to engineer chaos where possible: over the years I’ve interviewed authors Michel Houellebecq and Grant Morrison, artists Banksy, Kelsey Brookes and Cleon Peterson , film director Paul Verhoeven and The Venus Project’s Jacques Fresco ( RiP ). Plus a bunch of musicians, including Bill Drummond from the KLF. The interview was conducted over the telephone and he was driving; I pictured him slicing through the Scottish countryside behind the wheel of the band’s signature interceptor.  I’ve written about mental health since my award-winning column ‘Steve Beale is Unwell’ ran in Arena magazine during the mid-2000s, and up until much more recently in for example Mr Porter Journal . I write with mental health professionals including clinical psychologist Dr Stephen Blumenthal , who appeared in ground-breaking 2021 BBC documentary Joey Essex: Grief and Me . In 2020 I wrote a science fiction short story for Dazed & Confused magazine’s Lockdown Special that landed me on the writing team for Milkblood , a music and ‘ARG’  (ask your teenager) project from JJ Abrams’ Bad Robot studio and Tap Music Management. Other clients include art dealer and immersive event pioneer Steve Lazarides , plus spiritual teacher Jason Louv . See more on my agency website or email me here . And if martial arts, boxing and wrestling are your thing I urge you to check out another project, Battles of London . Men’s Health magazine calls it “the brand making fight clothing cool.”0:{"buildId":"x-vapnWmhMTJ3iyawQXvG","rsc":["$","$1","c",{"children":[["$","div",null,{"className":"relative flex min-h-screen w-full flex-col font-sans bg-black","children":[["$","$L2",null,{}],["$","div",null,{"className":"relative z-10 w-full mx-auto max-w-4xl p-4","children":[["$","header",null,{"className":"py-20 text-center","children":[["$","h1",null,{"className":"mb-6 flex justify-center","children":["$","$L3",null,{"src":"/images/logo-text-white.png","alt":"New Psychonaut","width":420,"height":128,"className":"h-24 md:h-32 w-auto object-contain drop-shadow-2xl","priority":true}]}],["$","p",null,{"className":"text-white/80 px-6 mb-8 text-center text-sm md:text-lg","children":"Consciousness research and technology."}],["$","div",null,{"className":"flex justify-center items-center gap-8 mb-4","children":[["$","a","https://github.com/chaosste",{"href":"https://github.com/chaosste","target":"_blank","rel":"noopener noreferrer","className":"hover:opacity-80 transition-opacity","aria-label":"GitHub","children":["$","$L3",null,{"src":"/images/icon-github.png","alt":"GitHub","width":35,"height":35,"className":"h-8 md:h-10 w-auto"}]}],["$","a","https://x.com/newpsychonaut",{"href":"https://x.com/newpsychonaut","target":"_blank","rel":"noopener noreferrer","className":"hover:opacity-80 transition-opacity","aria-label":"X","children":["$","$L3",null,{"src":"/images/icon-twitter.png","alt":"X","width":29,"height":29,"className":"h-[1.7rem] md:h-[2.15rem] w-auto"}]}],["$","a","https://www.instagram.com/newpsychonaut",{"href":"https://www.instagram.com/newpsychonaut","target":"_blank","rel":"noopener noreferrer","className":"hover:opacity-80 transition-opacity","aria-label":"Instagram","children":["$","$L3",null,{"src":"/images/icon-instagram.png","alt":"Instagram","width":32,"height":32,"className":"h-8 md:h-10 w-auto"}]}]]}],["$","$L4",null,{"placeholder":"Enter email to expand consciousness","className":"mx-auto max-w-[17rem] sm:max-w-[18rem] md:max-w-[19rem]"}]]}],["$","main",null,{"className":"flex flex-col gap-6 pb-20 px-4 md:px-0","children":["$","$L5",null,{"posts":[{"title":"Holding Space for the Lads","slug":"holding-space-for-the-lads","date":"2026-02-11 21:58:24","excerpt":"$6"},{"title":"Woo and the Nature of Man","slug":"woo-and-the-nature-of-man","date":"2026-02-11 21:58:24","excerpt":"$7"},{"title":"Woo and the Nature of Man – new pages dedicated to Research","slug":"woo-and-the-nature-of-man-new-pages-dedicated-to-r","date":"2024-11-12 16:02:00","excerpt":"$8"},{"title":"Asian voices in the Psychedelic Movement: 24hr Circle Sat 25 May 2024","slug":"asian-voices-in-the-psychedelic-movement-24hr-circ","date":"2024-05-02 21:41:26","excerpt":"$9"},{"title":"I’ve got more outfit changes than spoken lines in the Vital Breaking Convention video","slug":"ive-got-more-outfit-changes-than-spoken-lines-in-t","date":"2023-11-26 02:34:25","excerpt":"$a"},{"title":"All Things Jewish: 24hr Circle Sunday 26 November","slug":"all-things-jewish-24hr-circle-sunday-26-november","date":"2023-11-26 01:19:28","excerpt":"$b"},{"title":"Veterans and Plant Medicine: 24hr Circle Saturday 15 July","slug":"veterans-and-plant-medicine-24hr-circle-saturday-1","date":"2023-06-26 12:35:59","excerpt":"$c"},{"title":"Psychedelics and Environmental Activism: 24hr Circle Saturday 10 June 2023","slug":"psychedelics-and-environmental-activism-24hr-circl","date":"2023-06-07 09:35:32","excerpt":"$d"},{"title":"Sacred Sexuality: 24hr Circle Saturday 27 May","slug":"sacred-sexuality-24hr-circle-saturday-27-may","date":"2023-05-27 02:57:47","excerpt":"$e"},{"title":"Actually breaking through to the other side","slug":"actually-breaking-through-to-the-other-side","date":"2023-05-24 16:22:30","excerpt":"$f"},{"title":"I graduated from Vital","slug":"i-graduated-from-vital","date":"2023-05-21 13:32:20","excerpt":"$10"},{"title":"Summer 2023 Kaftan Collection","slug":"summer-2023-kaftan-collection","date":"2023-05-21 12:43:00","excerpt":"$11"},{"title":"Unofficial Vital ‘Zine Class of ‘23 Edition","slug":"unofficial-vital-zine-class-of-23-edition","date":"2023-05-18 20:59:23","excerpt":"The final slide of my Vital student presentation Click here to see all the issues of the ‘Zine I’ve made to cover my studies on Psychedelics Today’s acclaimed training course Vital. You’ll see the cribsheet format I presented to classmates and tutors near the end of the final term. There’s a modest sample below. I still have a handful of sessions to write up which I’ll enjoy doing over the summer. In autumn ‘23 I have plans to study further which are in good stead. More details when they’re fully confirmed."},{"title":"Unofficial Vital ‘Zine #19 up now with Ido Cohen","slug":"unofficial-vital-zine-19-up-now-with-ido-cohen","date":"2023-05-18 20:27:15","excerpt":"$12"},{"title":"The Jung Ones","slug":"the-jung-ones","date":"2023-05-18 01:00:00","excerpt":"$13"},{"title":"New Aion","slug":"new-aion","date":"2023-05-18 00:42:19","excerpt":"$14"},{"title":"What Goddess encounters really say about your lifestyle","slug":"what-goddess-encounters-really-say-about-your-life","date":"2023-05-18 00:08:36","excerpt":"$15"},{"title":"You Must Respect the Circle of Life to Drink Ayahuasca","slug":"you-must-respect-the-circle-of-life-to-drink-ayahu","date":"2023-05-17 23:48:18","excerpt":"$16"},{"title":"Lower doses better for shadow work say Jungian therapists","slug":"lower-doses-better-for-shadow-work-say-jungian-the","date":"2023-05-17 23:01:01","excerpt":"$17"},{"title":"Revenge of the Shadow","slug":"revenge-of-the-shadow","date":"2023-05-17 22:20:17","excerpt":"$18"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #19","slug":"kool-aid-corner-19","date":"2023-05-17 22:20:00","excerpt":"$19"},{"title":"Men’s Stories: 24hr Circle Saturday 12 March","slug":"mens-stories-24hr-circle-saturday-12-march","date":"2023-03-01 18:04:00","excerpt":"At 11am UK time on Sunday 12 March 2023 I’m moderating Entheo Nation Washington’s latest 24 hour Zoom circle. My holding space face Jump on, listen to psychedelic-tinged tales of masculine triumph and failiure. Everyone’s welcome – it’s a lifesaver on microdosing day or if you’re stuck on your own. Moderators change every hour. Get the link for the free sesh via Eventbrite or info@entheosociety.net."},{"title":"Integration: planning and meaning making with Kyle Buller","slug":"integration-planning-and-meaning-making-with-kyle-","date":"2023-02-05 23:59:00","excerpt":"$1a"},{"title":"Into the Unknown?","slug":"into-the-unknown","date":"2023-02-05 23:50:00","excerpt":"$1b"},{"title":"Attention Ideology","slug":"attention-ideology","date":"2023-02-05 23:23:00","excerpt":"$1c"},{"title":"Calling Interdimensional Rescue","slug":"calling-interdimensional-rescue","date":"2023-02-05 23:08:00","excerpt":"$1d"},{"title":"Wavy Garms","slug":"wavy-garms","date":"2023-02-05 22:17:00","excerpt":"$1e"},{"title":"Heoric Doses of Reality","slug":"heoric-doses-of-reality","date":"2023-02-05 22:08:00","excerpt":"$1f"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #18","slug":"kool-aid-corner-18","date":"2023-02-05 21:14:00","excerpt":"$20"},{"title":"Strip Reports","slug":"strip-reports","date":"2023-01-22 23:04:00","excerpt":"$21"},{"title":"Clinical skills for psyhchedelic therapy with Dr Adele Lafrance","slug":"clinical-skills-for-psyhchedelic-therapy-with-dr-a","date":"2022-10-26 22:59:00","excerpt":"$22"},{"title":"The Feeling Theory","slug":"the-feeling-theory","date":"2022-10-26 22:48:00","excerpt":"$23"},{"title":"Four Times You Probably Should Intervene with the Voyager’s Experience","slug":"four-times-you-probably-should-intervene-with-the-","date":"2022-10-26 22:43:00","excerpt":"$24"},{"title":"Don’t Go There","slug":"dont-go-there","date":"2022-10-26 22:26:00","excerpt":"$25"},{"title":"Anger is an NRG","slug":"anger-is-an-nrg","date":"2022-10-26 21:53:00","excerpt":"$26"},{"title":"Trip for me babe… trip for you?","slug":"trip-for-me-babe-trip-for-you","date":"2022-10-26 20:49:00","excerpt":"$27"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #17","slug":"kool-aid-corner-17","date":"2022-10-26 16:42:00","excerpt":"$28"},{"title":"Substances and mechanisms with Dr Charles Nichols","slug":"substances-and-mechanisms-with-dr-charles-nichols","date":"2022-09-15 08:37:00","excerpt":"$29"},{"title":"Appliance of Science","slug":"appliance-of-science","date":"2022-09-15 07:01:00","excerpt":"$2a"},{"title":"Neuroplastic Smiles","slug":"neuroplastic-smiles","date":"2022-09-15 00:29:00","excerpt":"$2b"},{"title":"Brain architecture and morality","slug":"brain-architecture-and-morality","date":"2022-09-15 00:28:00","excerpt":"$2c"},{"title":"Wicked Wheeze","slug":"wicked-wheeze","date":"2022-09-14 23:55:00","excerpt":"$2d"},{"title":"Transcendental family systems","slug":"transcendental-family-systems","date":"2022-09-14 23:28:00","excerpt":"$2e"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #16","slug":"kool-aid-corner-16","date":"2022-09-14 23:00:00","excerpt":"$2f"},{"title":"Medical Anthropology and Psychedelics with Dr Luis Eduardo Luna","slug":"medical-anthropology-and-psychedelics-with-dr-luis","date":"2022-07-27 22:59:00","excerpt":"$30"},{"title":"Vegetable rights and peace","slug":"vegetable-rights-and-peace","date":"2022-07-27 22:53:00","excerpt":"$31"},{"title":"The Hybrid Model","slug":"the-hybrid-model","date":"2022-07-27 22:46:00","excerpt":"$32"},{"title":"Vibing as one","slug":"vibing-as-one","date":"2022-07-27 22:25:00","excerpt":"$33"},{"title":"Soul reduction","slug":"soul-reduction","date":"2022-07-27 22:22:00","excerpt":"$34"},{"title":"Botanic therapy","slug":"botanic-therapy","date":"2022-07-27 21:10:00","excerpt":"$35"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #15","slug":"kool-aid-corner-15","date":"2022-07-27 17:04:00","excerpt":"$36"},{"title":"Trauma, addiction and MDMA therapy with Dr Ben Sessa","slug":"trauma-addiction-and-mdma-therapy-with-dr-ben-sess","date":"2022-07-20 22:59:00","excerpt":"$37"},{"title":"Indistinguishable from magic","slug":"indistinguishable-from-magic","date":"2022-07-20 22:53:00","excerpt":"$38"},{"title":"Behind the mask","slug":"behind-the-mask","date":"2022-07-20 22:44:00","excerpt":"$39"},{"title":"Where are you from and what are you on?","slug":"where-are-you-from-and-what-are-you-on","date":"2022-07-20 22:19:00","excerpt":"$3a"},{"title":"Ravers score rare victory over Mondays","slug":"ravers-score-rare-victory-over-mondays","date":"2022-07-20 22:15:00","excerpt":"$3b"},{"title":"Where social services are the new gods","slug":"where-social-services-are-the-new-gods","date":"2022-07-20 22:07:00","excerpt":"$3c"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #14","slug":"kool-aid-corner-14","date":"2022-07-20 16:17:00","excerpt":"$3d"},{"title":"Ketamine Assisted Therapy with Veronika Gold","slug":"ketamine-assisted-therapy-with-veronika-gold","date":"2022-07-13 22:59:00","excerpt":"$3e"},{"title":"On the couch 2.0","slug":"on-the-couch-20","date":"2022-07-13 22:27:00","excerpt":"$3f"},{"title":"Consciousness expansion for the masses","slug":"consciousness-expansion-for-the-masses","date":"2022-07-13 21:53:00","excerpt":"$40"},{"title":"Psychedelic overground","slug":"psychedelic-overground","date":"2022-07-13 20:11:00","excerpt":"$41"},{"title":"War and peace","slug":"war-and-peace","date":"2022-07-13 17:00:00","excerpt":"$42"},{"title":"As above, so below","slug":"as-above-so-below","date":"2022-07-13 16:51:00","excerpt":"$43"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #13","slug":"kool-aid-corner-13","date":"2022-07-13 14:07:00","excerpt":"$44"},{"title":"MDMA Assisted Therapy with Michael and Annie Mithoefer","slug":"mdma-assisted-therapy-with-michael-and-annie-mitho","date":"2022-07-06 22:50:00","excerpt":"$45"},{"title":"T-bombs away!","slug":"t-bombs-away","date":"2022-07-06 22:24:00","excerpt":"$46"},{"title":"Homestasis is where the heart is","slug":"homestasis-is-where-the-heart-is","date":"2022-07-06 20:45:00","excerpt":"$47"},{"title":"Drugs are the Love","slug":"drugs-are-the-love","date":"2022-07-06 19:36:00","excerpt":"$48"},{"title":"Inner space of safety","slug":"inner-space-of-safety","date":"2022-07-06 18:02:00","excerpt":"$49"},{"title":"Let them know it’s Saturnalia time","slug":"let-them-know-its-saturnalia-time","date":"2022-07-06 16:26:00","excerpt":"$4a"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #12","slug":"kool-aid-corner-12","date":"2022-07-06 11:52:00","excerpt":"$4b"},{"title":"Slow down, do your shadow work","slug":"slow-down-do-your-shadow-work","date":"2022-06-30 21:47:00","excerpt":"$4c"},{"title":"Psilocybin for depression with Ashleigh Murphy-Beiner","slug":"psilocybin-for-depression-with-ashleigh-murphy-bei","date":"2022-06-29 22:59:00","excerpt":"$4d"},{"title":"Feed your head","slug":"feed-your-head","date":"2022-06-29 22:31:00","excerpt":"$4e"},{"title":"Freud is dead","slug":"freud-is-dead","date":"2022-06-29 19:34:00","excerpt":"$4f"},{"title":"A Love Unconditional","slug":"a-love-unconditional","date":"2022-06-29 19:01:00","excerpt":"$50"},{"title":"Results Based","slug":"results-based","date":"2022-06-29 11:42:00","excerpt":"$51"},{"title":"IRL is a bummer","slug":"irl-is-a-bummer","date":"2022-06-29 02:51:00","excerpt":"$52"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #11","slug":"kool-aid-corner-11","date":"2022-06-29 00:28:00","excerpt":"$53"},{"title":"The Ethics of Caring in Psychedelic Therapy with Kylea Taylor","slug":"the-ethics-of-caring-in-psychedelic-therapy-with-k","date":"2022-06-27 06:09:00","excerpt":"$54"},{"title":"Power to Empower","slug":"power-to-empower","date":"2022-06-27 06:03:00","excerpt":"$55"},{"title":"Who’s therapy is it anyway?","slug":"whos-therapy-is-it-anyway","date":"2022-06-27 04:16:00","excerpt":"$56"},{"title":"Nothing beats lived experience","slug":"nothing-beats-lived-experience","date":"2022-06-27 03:32:00","excerpt":"$57"},{"title":"Unconditionally loving cuddles: Yes or No?","slug":"unconditionally-loving-cuddles-yes-or-no","date":"2022-06-27 01:22:00","excerpt":"$58"},{"title":"Impeccable you","slug":"impeccable-you","date":"2022-06-27 00:24:00","excerpt":"$59"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #10","slug":"kool-aid-corner-10","date":"2022-06-26 23:09:00","excerpt":"$5a"},{"title":"The Legality of Psychedelic Therapy with Courtney Barnes","slug":"the-legality-of-psychedelic-therapy-with-courtney-","date":"2022-06-26 13:36:00","excerpt":"$5b"},{"title":"More mushroom tea, vicar?","slug":"more-mushroom-tea-vicar","date":"2022-06-26 09:31:00","excerpt":"$5c"},{"title":"Hymn of the Big Wheel","slug":"hymn-of-the-big-wheel","date":"2022-06-26 07:53:00","excerpt":"$5d"},{"title":"UK leads new inner space race","slug":"uk-leads-new-inner-space-race","date":"2022-06-26 04:53:00","excerpt":"$5e"},{"title":"The New Bethlehem. Not like the Old Bedlam","slug":"the-new-bethlehem-not-like-the-old-bedlam","date":"2022-06-26 03:37:00","excerpt":"$5f"},{"title":"Once and future Albion","slug":"once-and-future-albion","date":"2022-06-26 00:04:00","excerpt":"$60"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #9","slug":"kool-aid-corner-9","date":"2022-06-25 23:00:00","excerpt":"$61"},{"title":"Emerging landscapes with Dr Bennet Zelner","slug":"emerging-landscapes-with-dr-bennet-zelner","date":"2022-06-24 08:47:00","excerpt":"$62"},{"title":"Healing of the Nation","slug":"healing-of-the-nation","date":"2022-06-24 07:33:00","excerpt":"$63"},{"title":"Re-Story-Ation","slug":"re-story-ation","date":"2022-06-24 05:09:00","excerpt":"$64"},{"title":"Complex cosmologies, explained","slug":"complex-cosmologies-explained","date":"2022-06-24 04:32:00","excerpt":"$65"},{"title":"Village Green Preservation Society","slug":"village-green-preservation-society","date":"2022-06-24 04:25:00","excerpt":"$66"},{"title":"Infinite Debt to the Biosphere","slug":"infinite-debt-to-the-biosphere","date":"2022-06-24 00:09:00","excerpt":"$67"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #8","slug":"kool-aid-corner-8","date":"2022-06-23 23:34:00","excerpt":"$68"},{"title":"Contemporary Research with Dr Rick Strassman","slug":"contemporary-research-with-dr-rick-strassman","date":"2022-06-23 08:31:00","excerpt":"$69"},{"title":"Boldly going where no heads have gone before","slug":"boldly-going-where-no-heads-have-gone-before","date":"2022-06-23 06:18:00","excerpt":"$6a"},{"title":"This may hurt a little…","slug":"this-may-hurt-a-little","date":"2022-06-23 05:48:00","excerpt":"$6b"},{"title":"Holy vape pens, Metatron!","slug":"holy-vape-pens-metatron","date":"2022-06-23 05:39:00","excerpt":"$6c"},{"title":"The lollipop of optimism","slug":"the-lollipop-of-optimism","date":"2022-06-23 04:13:00","excerpt":"$6d"},{"title":"Peak sexual experience","slug":"peak-sexual-experience","date":"2022-06-23 02:12:00","excerpt":"$6e"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #7","slug":"kool-aid-corner-7","date":"2022-06-23 00:34:00","excerpt":"$6f"},{"title":"Philosophy of Psychedelics with Dr Peter Sjöstedt-Hughes","slug":"philosophy-of-psychedelics-with-dr-peter-sjstedt-h","date":"2022-06-21 23:53:00","excerpt":"$70"},{"title":"Next Up, The Psychedelic Enlightenment","slug":"next-up-the-psychedelic-enlightenment","date":"2022-06-21 23:20:00","excerpt":"$71"},{"title":"Become one with your Moomin cup…","slug":"become-one-with-your-moomin-cup","date":"2022-06-21 23:08:00","excerpt":"$72"},{"title":"Who knows what lurks in the hearts of men and women?","slug":"who-knows-what-lurks-in-the-hearts-of-men-and-wome","date":"2022-06-21 23:04:00","excerpt":"$73"},{"title":"More healthy, less normal","slug":"more-healthy-less-normal","date":"2022-06-21 23:03:00","excerpt":"$74"},{"title":"Rising from the Ashes of God","slug":"rising-from-the-ashes-of-god","date":"2022-06-21 23:02:00","excerpt":"$75"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #6","slug":"kool-aid-corner-6","date":"2022-06-21 23:01:00","excerpt":"$76"},{"title":"Transpersonal psychology with Dr David Luke: Vital Student Zine #5","slug":"transpersonal-psychology-with-dr-david-luke-vital-","date":"2022-06-07 08:42:00","excerpt":"$77"},{"title":"Transpersonal psychology is back and this time it’s real","slug":"transpersonal-psychology-is-back-and-this-time-its","date":"2022-06-06 08:42:00","excerpt":"$78"},{"title":"Mysteries of the psychedelic divine feminine","slug":"mysteries-of-the-psychedelic-divine-feminine","date":"2022-06-05 08:42:00","excerpt":"$79"},{"title":"Strength of street knowledge","slug":"strength-of-street-knowledge","date":"2022-06-04 08:42:00","excerpt":"$7a"},{"title":"DMT vs Death","slug":"dmt-vs-death","date":"2022-06-03 08:42:00","excerpt":"$7b"},{"title":"Alchemy for the People","slug":"alchemy-for-the-people","date":"2022-06-02 08:42:00","excerpt":"$7c"},{"title":"Kool aid corner #5","slug":"kool-aid-corner-5","date":"2022-06-01 08:42:00","excerpt":"$7d"},{"title":"Vital Study Zine Week Five: Actually Breaking on Through to the Other Side","slug":"vital-study-zine-week-five-actually-breaking-on-th","date":"2022-05-26 02:18:33","excerpt":"$7e"},{"title":"The Early Psychedelic Years with Dr Bill Richards","slug":"the-early-psychedelic-years-with-dr-bill-richards","date":"2022-05-23 17:06:00","excerpt":"$7f"},{"title":"The Wisdom of the Human mind","slug":"the-wisdom-of-the-human-mind","date":"2022-05-23 17:06:00","excerpt":"$80"},{"title":"Cosmic Midwifery","slug":"cosmic-midwifery","date":"2022-05-22 17:06:00","excerpt":"$81"},{"title":"Healing with Laughter","slug":"healing-with-laughter","date":"2022-05-22 17:06:00","excerpt":"$82"},{"title":"Vital Study Zine Week Four: Roll up for the Magical Mystery School","slug":"vital-study-zine-week-four-roll-up-for-the-magical","date":"2022-05-21 19:33:46","excerpt":"$83"},{"title":"Guess who’s back?","slug":"guess-whos-back","date":"2022-05-21 17:06:00","excerpt":"$84"},{"title":"Vital Study Zine Week Three: Civilisation on Acid","slug":"vital-study-zine-week-three-civilisation-on-acid","date":"2022-05-19 21:41:49","excerpt":"$85"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #4","slug":"kool-aid-corner-4","date":"2022-05-17 17:06:00","excerpt":"$86"},{"title":"The Wrong Mysteries","slug":"the-wrong-mysteries","date":"2022-05-17 17:06:00","excerpt":"$87"},{"title":"Vital Study Zine Week Two: The Sacred and the Humane","slug":"vital-study-zine-week-two-the-sacred-and-the-human","date":"2022-05-01 22:35:00","excerpt":"$88"},{"title":"Britain's only traditional master builder is erecting stone circles in Glastonbury","slug":"britains-only-traditional-master-builder-is-erecti","date":"2022-05-01 07:04:00","excerpt":"$89"},{"title":"Shamanism, Philosophy, and Ancient Greece with Dr Lenny Gibson","slug":"shamanism-philosophy-and-ancient-greece-with-dr-le","date":"2022-05-01 04:43:00","excerpt":"$8a"},{"title":"Move any mountain with neo-shamanism","slug":"move-any-mountain-with-neo-shamanism","date":"2022-05-01 03:05:00","excerpt":"$8b"},{"title":"‘Celebrating the mysteries’ is the new euphemism of choice","slug":"celebrating-the-mysteries-is-the-new-euphemism-of-","date":"2022-05-01 02:22:00","excerpt":"$8c"},{"title":"Can you hold your own?","slug":"can-you-hold-your-own","date":"2022-05-01 01:54:00","excerpt":"$8d"},{"title":"The Microdose Age","slug":"the-microdose-age","date":"2022-05-01 01:01:00","excerpt":"$8e"},{"title":"Learning to fly","slug":"learning-to-fly","date":"2022-05-01 00:25:00","excerpt":"$8f"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #3","slug":"kool-aid-corner-3","date":"2022-04-30 23:51:00","excerpt":"$90"},{"title":"Exploring Indigenous Traditions and Wisdom with Dr Joe Tafur","slug":"exploring-indigenous-traditions-and-wisdom-with-dr","date":"2022-04-26 01:58:00","excerpt":"$91"},{"title":"Saving lost souls for three million years. And now with MDMA","slug":"saving-lost-souls-for-three-million-years-and-now-","date":"2022-04-26 01:19:00","excerpt":"$92"},{"title":"Psychedelic therapy is an art first and a science second","slug":"psychedelic-therapy-is-an-art-first-and-a-science-","date":"2022-04-26 01:00:00","excerpt":"$93"},{"title":"Songs in the key of life: energy and entropy","slug":"songs-in-the-key-of-life-energy-and-entropy","date":"2022-04-26 00:40:00","excerpt":"$94"},{"title":"Spiritual healing could help cure epigenetic disease and transform treatment","slug":"spiritual-healing-could-help-cure-epigenetic-disea","date":"2022-04-26 00:29:00","excerpt":"$95"},{"title":"The Eagle and the Condor","slug":"the-eagle-and-the-condor","date":"2022-04-26 00:10:00","excerpt":"$96"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner","slug":"kool-aid-corner","date":"2022-04-26 00:03:00","excerpt":"$97"},{"title":"Vital Study Zine Week One: The Ground Zero of LSD Research","slug":"vital-study-zine-week-one-the-ground-zero-of-lsd-r","date":"2022-04-24 22:59:00","excerpt":"$98"},{"title":"Why the Psychedelic Past is Important for the Future with Dr Erika Dyck","slug":"why-the-psychedelic-past-is-important-for-the-futu","date":"2022-04-24 21:02:00","excerpt":"$99"},{"title":"Are ‘corporadelics’ doing enough for set, setting… and society?","slug":"are-corporadelics-doing-enough-for-set-setting-and","date":"2022-04-24 21:01:00","excerpt":"$9a"},{"title":"Alcoholics Anonymous founder Bill W’s LSD use inspired 12-Step and cured his depression","slug":"alcoholics-anonymous-founder-bill-ws-lsd-use-inspi","date":"2022-04-24 20:55:00","excerpt":"$9b"},{"title":"Women invented chill out DJing","slug":"women-invented-chill-out-djing","date":"2022-04-24 20:10:00","excerpt":"$9c"},{"title":"Public opinion had a huge effect on research back then. It still does.","slug":"public-opinion-had-a-huge-effect-on-research-back-","date":"2022-04-24 20:07:00","excerpt":"Social disapproval – not legislation – wiped out LSD testing in the 20th Century Medical Poison ‘The first lady of LSD history’ Dr Ericka Dyck’s Vital presentation began with a curved ball. The Canadian historian pointed out that pharmaceuticals were bang on-trend during the 1950s after the successful roll-out of anti-psychotic chlorpromazine (Thorazine). This generated goodwill for tests on more ‘wonder drugs’. However, in the early1960s the startling effects of thalidomide on pregnancy came to light. “Images of deformed children caused outcry and a moral panic over testing ethics,” plus the emerging anti-modernity movement fuelled a backlash that brought LSD – brand name ‘Delysid’ – testing to a halt in Canada by 1962. Leary was fired from Harvard in April 1962. FDA-sanctioned research continued until 1977, but funding and support rapidly became non-existent. Related reading Kool-Aid Corner #1 Architecture is the trippiest job"},{"title":"Architecture is the trippiest job","slug":"architecture-is-the-trippiest-job","date":"2022-04-24 19:02:00","excerpt":"$9d"},{"title":"Kool-Aid Corner #1","slug":"kool-aid-corner-1","date":"2022-04-24 15:30:00","excerpt":"$9e"},{"title":"Frontline workers on Vital: “The mental health crisis is real”","slug":"frontline-workers-on-vital-the-mental-health-crisi","date":"2022-04-23 20:34:00","excerpt":"$9f"},{"title":"What happens on Vital Psychedelic Training?","slug":"what-happens-on-vital-psychedelic-training","date":"2022-04-18 20:00:00","excerpt":"$a0"},{"title":"Who I am, and why I started this blog","slug":"who-i-am-and-why-i-started-this-blog","date":"2022-04-15 17:27:00","excerpt":"$a1"}]}]}]]}]]}],null,"$La2"]}],"loading":null,"isPartial":false}
a2:["$","$La3",null,{"children":["$","$a4",null,{"name":"Next.MetadataOutlet","children":"$@a5"}]}]
a5:null
